Hey everybody Rob here
Today we're gonna talk about all the things
That you need to do to make an amazing video
In particular we're gonna talk about pre-production
Which is all the things that you need to do before you grab that camera
Then, production, which is everything; once you grab that camera and you start shooting
and then post-production
Which is the process of taking that footage, ingesting it, and making the final product.
This is kind of giving you a feel for what we're going to be talking in this course
and then we're going to go into detail in future videos here
with each of the individual steps
and explain them a bit further
Alright, lets get started with pre-production
Alright, now the very first step in this whole process
is coming up with your story
What is the idea that you want to make a film about?
Often times, I will actually take a notebook, like this, this is good way to keep track of your story ideas.
I'll write them down here whenever they come to mind, and then I can refer back to them later.
Then next step is thinking about your audience.
This is really important because whoever your audience is, and how they're going to see it
They are gonna determine how you structure the rest of your film
Now for instance, we actually made all of the videos for this Biology textbook.
In a DVD in the back of the book.
So, in theory our audience was students.
So at the same time our audience was the teachers.
Cause the teachers had to watch the video first, think it was relevant to show to students in a classroom setting.
Really we are trying to make these videos, so you can show them to your class, mix up the lessons and make them more effective.
If we were making videos for people flipping through instagram, or through facebook
and we have a picture in our head of who's going to be watching them
we would make very different videos
We'd have it a lot spicier at the very beginning, but we had a captivated audience in those classrooms
So, did you see how it could structure the rest of the film?
obviously very important
Now, I wanna bring up clients and contracts
now obviously you can work with clients and do contracts at any stage in this process
But for me, definitely at this stage we are ready to sign a contract
and move forward with the rest of the scripting process
Alright, at this stage it's very important to think about
all of my books on how to make good films. Are you can use a narrator, or are you going to use a host?
Is it going to be first person or third person?
Is it going to be avant guarde or maybe an indie film?
There's so many ways that you can tell your story
But now is the stage you're going to have to figure out how you're gonna do it.
Alright, next thing you gotta do, is you gotta do your research.
You gotta figure out "What do people know about this topic?"
and maybe more importantly, has anyone done a video on it?
And if so, how are you going to make yours different
Now you're ready for the scripting process
Essentially you're going to start with a very detailed outline step by step
and if you're shooting a documentary
You may actually end with that outline
but if you want to take it one step further
then you're going to write a detailed script
Now, you're ready to wrap up pre-production
and you're gonna need to think about everything you need before you shoot
That might include, for instance, thinking about your location. You might even wanna go scout your location
then you're gonna have to think about all the logistics needed to get to that location and make it happen
and finally you're gonna have to make sure you have a good crew in place.
Alright, at this stage you're ready to shoot
this is the production process
for instance Jonah shoots all of our things
I shoot with Leo all the time
he's gonna be the talent here
Hailey often does a lot of the production
this is how it looks
But there are so many steps involved in making a good shot
I'm gonna kinda glaze over it at this stage
and we're gonna jump straight to post-production
Alright, now you got your media
you got everything shot and you're gonna start the post-production process
now sometimes you'll back up things in the field
lets say you didn't. You're going to plug your media into your computer
and you're gonna start media managing
this is a really important step.
essentially for us we're gonna use external drives here
we're gonna back it up there
we're gonna maybe make another copy
send it to another location
but from there that's where our rough cut starts
Oftentimes we'll have an assistant editor
or somebody to piece all the footage together so the editor can go through and start making cuts a bit easier
but this is where the real art happens
and I mean it is a very difficult process
one of the things you might do after the rough cut gets started
is do narration, for instance, I do that over here
It's actually kind of our closet
but its also a very nice sound proof room
I have these nice foam pads. I'll record my narration into here and then take it back to my rough cut
then I drop the narration in, start adding music and effects , I do color correction
I start fine tuning
I'll start working with the client. I will send them a copy
and say "Hey what do you think about this version?"
and they'll give me comments
and we just go back and forth in this somewhat of a dance
until we wrap things up
but that's more or less the whole process
Background voice: You just said that word for word holy crap.
this is kind of the first of the series
we have more detailed videos on all of these coming up
so if you're keen on this process
stay tuned I think you're really going to like it
uhh, that means you should subscribe
first of all, like this video if you got something out of it.
and big thanks to our patrons, who are allowing to take the time to give this to you guys
and we will get the next one out to you on Tuesday
Working with a film crew is great Rob and Jonas are awesome
they bring so many toys out on the boat with us
and uh lots of batteries too, nothing ever dies
and they never make us repeat answers to questions or anything
they always just ask you the question one time and that's it
its done, so uh
it's fantastic.
