Welcome to Iran. 
A fascinating country with an immense history,
and one of the world's most surprising travel destinations.
From the ruins of Persepolis to the bustling streets of Tehran.
From spectacular desert landscapes to lively
historic bazaars and charming villages.
Today's Iran is an intriguing, complicated, but also
a beautiful place.
With some of the friendliest and welcoming people you will ever meet.
In this video, I take you back to one of my favorite journeys,
through a country that has long been a mystery to outsiders.
These are my 10 favorite places in Iran.
We begin this journey in Esfahan, one of Iran's most popular cities,
with incredible architecture, and a welcoming attitude.
The city is filled with captivating monuments, delicate
Persian gardens, and historic buildings.
Walking the beautiful bazaars and meeting the people in the streets
provides a great introduction into daily life in Iran.
Our next destination in Kerman, a desert city in the East of the country,
and an important stopoever on historic trading routes,
between Persia and the Indian subcontinent.
While Kerman can be explored for a few days, most
travelers come here for what lies outside the city.
Mahan is famous for its tranquil gardens and shrine.
While the small town of Rayen is home to the mysterious 'Arg',
an ancient citadel built more than 1,000 years ago.
We travel onwards to the Kaluts,
a series of peculiar sand castles, formed over millennia
by a one directional wind. 
Located in the inhospitable Lut desert, this is one of Iran's
most mesmerizing desert landscapes.
In the South of Iran lies Qeshm, the largest
island in the Persian Gulf.
The island can be reached by ferry from Bandar Abbas,
and provides a great insight into local Bandari culture.
There are plenty of villages to explore,
where you get a chance to get up close with farmers and fishermen.
Don't miss the 'lenge' building yards,
where traditional wooden cargo vessels, that used
to sail the Gulf, are still being made.
We travel further to Shiraz,
regarded as the epicenter of Persian culture
for the last 2,000 years.
This city boasts some of the country's most beautiful mosques,
ancient bazaars, historic buildings,
and in general a laid back and friendly atmosphere.
Among Iranians, it is perhaps most famous for the tombs of Hafez and Sa'di,
two poets that hold a special place in Iranian literature and society.
Not far from Shiraz is Persepolis,
a city that was at the heart of the Achaemenid empire.
Walking through the ruins of this once bustling city
feels like stepping into a different world. 
And its former palaces evoke images of a thriving ancient Persia.
Our next destination in Tehran,
the dynamic capital city, and beating economic heart, of Iran.
It may not be the most attractive city in the country,
with sprawling urban streets and busy traffic,
but it's -the- place to learn about modern Iran.
You will be reminded of the 1979 revolution,
especially by walking past the former US embassy,
or visiting the Azadi monument.
But it's the regular streets, cafes, and teahouses,
that give a true impression of this city,
which is the most secular and liberal in Iran.
Two hours South from Tehran is Qom, 
the second holiest city in Iran,
and an important place of worship in Shia Islam.
Pilgrims from Iran and beyond come here to visit the shrine of Fatimeh,
and soak up the religious atmosphere.
As on the country's most conservative cities, it feels
distinctly different from other places in Iran.
The mountain villages of Kandovan may remind travelers of
the famous Capadocia region in Turkey.
Some of the homes here are carved out of eroded rocks,
in a peculiar landscape of boulders and peaks.
It's a pleasant place to spend the afternoon, and there are
also options to stay overnight.
We finish our journey in Tabriz, a large city in the Northwest of Iran.
While there are plenty of areas to visit here,
the city is famous for its magnificent bazaar,
perhaps the most beautiful in the country.
Everything you can imagine is sold here.
From spices to carpets, and from gold to perfumes.
But like in most places in Iran, it's the people that you'll meet
along the way that will leave a lasting impression.
And that concludes my personal top 10 places to visit in Iran.
One of the world's most rewarding and eye-opening travel destinations.
I hope this video gave you some inspiration for the future, or at least
provided some new insights into this fascinating place.
If you enjoyed watching, feel free to give a like and leave a comment below.
Thanks for your support, and I hope to see you again next time.
Travel safely!
