The Battle of Teutoburg Forest is one of 
the grimmest days in Roman military history  
which has captivated historians and the general 
public for centuries. Naturally much attention has  
been placed on analyzing the lead up to battle, 
the ambush, and the ensuing ripple effects across  
the Empire. In these narratives, the subject of 
the battlefield itself is only useful up until the  
Roman army is defeated at which point it becomes 
discarded in favor of other, more relevant topics.  
Rarely do we hear about what happened in the dark 
forests after the fighting ended or of the Roman  
army’s return to these haunted lands. Today let 
us explore this fascinating historical blindspot.
a big thanks to the great courses 
plus for sponsoring this video  
they offer subscription-based on-demand lecture 
videos put together by top professors from  
renowned universities and specialists from places 
like national geographic and the smithsonian  
you get unlimited access to a huge library of over 
11 000 videos which cover topics from history to  
science math and literature with new content 
being added every month their history playlist  
is honestly amazing and they have an incredibly 
detailed 24 part series on the roman empire  
to enrich our own recent content definitely 
check out lecture 2 on the career of augustus  
and lecture 3 on his successor tiberius for me 
i found it best to download the app on my phone  
this allows me to swap from video 
to audio mode so i can listen to the  
series as a podcast while going about my daily 
activities right now the great courses plus is  
offering a free trial which you can start by 
clicking the link in the description below  
or visiting thegreatcoursesplus.com invicta 
i highly recommend that you take a look at  
what they have to offer and dive into the 
material that you are most interested in
As the story goes, three Roman legions and their 
auxiliaries entered the forests of Germania in  
9 AD and met their doom at the hands of the 
traitor Arminius and his cleverly laid trap.  
The fighting occurred in stages over 
several days as the Roman column was  
slowly gnawed upon and eventually swallowed 
whole. Seeing this inevitable doom upon them,  
the imperial officer corp and General 
Varus himself committed suicide.
After the Roman army had completed its convulsive 
death throes, the entire forest must have come to  
an ominous still. It's hard to imagine just 
what that transition must have felt like  
as the violent yells of some 20,000 dead or 
captured gave way to the chirping of birds.
What happened next is not clear as we have no 
direct sources on the matter from the victor’s  
perspective. However we can start to get an idea 
from a few key Roman writers like Tacitus combined  
with our understanding of warfare from the period 
as well as the findings of modern archaeology.
The first people to set foot on the 
battlefield once the fighting had  
ended would have been the 
victorious German tribes.  
Several immediate goals were in order:
1. Hunting down survivors 
2. Tending to the dead
3. Taking prizes
The first order of business would already have 
begun over the course of the battle and extended  
several days after. The author Paterculus for 
example mentions an instance of Roman horsemen  
abandoning the main body of infantry during 
the assault and fleeing for the Rhine  
only to be slain along the way. Elsewhere it 
seems that groups of soldiers or individuals  
melted away into the surrounding 
woods and marshes seeking refuge.  
The Germans however knew that this was their 
chance to inflict as much damage as possible  
to the enemy and would not have allowed their 
quarry to slip so easily through their net. After  
all THEY were the masters of this land and would 
have held the advantage in such a deadly hunt.
Archaeology of the area reveals incredible 
stories of the pursuit that occured.  
For instance near a portion of the Germanic 
wall, a bell was found, still attached to the  
neck of a mule. It was stuffed full of grass, 
indicating that some panicked Roman soldiers  
had attempted to silence it in their desperation 
to avoid detection while listening to the cries  
of their comrades being slaughtered around them. 
It's unlikely that their efforts were successful.  
Other stories are small and similarly terrifying: 
the small scatterings of coins that tell of an  
officer's purse that spilled across the muddy 
ground. The small caches where soldiers dug  
holes for their money. The clasps from 
armour that was torn off of the bodies.  
The surgeons' tools, all lying together, as the 
medics themselves were killed or taken captive.  
We do know that some Roman soldiers did 
manage to make it out of there alive  
and fall back to their own lines, regrouping 
at the last standing fortress of Aliso.  
However the percentage of those who 
achieved such an escape was quite low.
Meanwhile the Germans would have begun their 
second initiative, tending to the dead. The  
tribesmen were sure to comb over the battlefield 
recovering as many of their own as possible.  
Any wounded allies would be quickly brought 
to their own healers while any Roman survivors  
were generally dispatched with a spear thrust 
to the neck. Those Germans who could not be  
saved or who had already perished would have been 
brought back to their own villages where funeral  
arrangements could be made. Such ceremonies 
varied from locale to locale - but typically  
involved the dead being placed on a pyre, a speech 
being delivered by the head of the community,  
and the body being burned by the deceased 
individual's surviving family. The warrior’s  
weapons might accompany him in the fire, be placed 
alongside his ashes in a grave, or stay with the  
family which kept his burnt remains in a treasured 
urn to be passed down through the generations.
The Romans suffered a far less 
solemn and honourable fate.  
Like many other cultures around the world, the 
Germans took prisoners after a victory in battle.  
The lucky ones would be carted 
off to face a life of servitude.  
The unlucky ones would be sacrificed to the gods. 
It seems that this act could take many forms.  
Tacitus mentions how special altars had been 
prepared for prominent centurions and tribunes.  
Tradition dictated that such victims be 
treated just like any other animal offering.  
As such a priest would oversee the affair, 
chanting a prayer to the subject deity while  
preparing to wield the sacred knife. Roman sources 
claim that the actual killing would only come  
once the victim had assented to the rite. For 
livestock this would be done by using a rope to  
induce a bow from the animal. Its easy to imagine 
the same being done to their Roman replacements.  
Once this step had been completed, the 
priest would slash the victim’s neck,  
allowing the blood to spill over the 
altar, the priest, and the land itself.
Other victims were ritually hung from oak trees. 
The practice involved teams of men raising the  
captive with a rope, slowly strangling the 
victim while a priest chanted his prayers.  
Yet more sacrificial practices called for 
decapitation with the severed heads being  
nailed to the trees as a way to demarcate an 
entire area as a gruesome temple to victory.  
Finally, some Romans were simply just thrown 
into the marshes, already considered to be  
sacred ground, as both an offering and a thanks 
to the gods in the dark recesses of the woods.  
But such special attention could not be paid 
to the thousands of Roman vanquished. The rest  
would be afforded no honours or holy rites. They 
would be cleared from the road, which was still  
an important route for commerce and communication, 
and piled up haphazardly to rot in the open air.
As the bodies were moved, the Germans 
would undertake their third immediate goal,  
the taking of prizes. There was 
much of material value to be looted.  
For instance, governor Varus and his officers 
surely had riches aplenty stored away in their  
baggage train near the head of the army 
while the troops stowed their own prized  
possessions in the baggage compartments taking 
up the rear. Among the carts strewn across the  
forest would also be valuables belonging to 
the camp followers who accompanied the army.  
Once these trunks had been emptied, the dead 
themselves would be despoiled. Purses cut,  
jewelry snatched off, and rings pried from cold, 
bloated fingers. This would have been a gold rush  
for the victors who could have gotten their hands 
on everything from rare minerals to cooking wares.
But perhaps some of the most prized sources of 
loot would be the tens of thousands of sets of  
weapons and armour. Afterall every Roman soldier 
was a professional with their own set of high end  
kit forged by skilled manufacturers and smiths. 
These had long been prized in Germany as valuable  
trade goods and for practical use in inter-tribal 
warfare. It seems that the battlefield was so  
thoroughly picked clean of these items that 
archaeological investigations of the site  
have failed to turn up weapons and armour in 
any large numbers. Instead what we find are  
thousands of tiny nails from Roman sandals which 
the barbarians showed no interest in collecting.
One of the most iconic pieces that's been found 
on the site of Teutoburg, though, is an iron  
mask. It's thought to have been the property of 
one of the German auxiliaries who betrayed the  
Roman army. It was originally plated in silver, 
but the silver was stripped off for reuse.  
The mask itself, though, was left at the foot 
of the wall that had been built for this ambush,  
in a spot where the killing had been the 
highest. It was a symbol and an offering:  
the auxiliary who left it wanted to ensure that 
passersby knew who had done this, wanted to  
offer it as a sacrifice, and wanted to indicate 
that he had cast aside all of his former ties.
Another important battlefield prize were the 
Roman army standards. Though not of much material  
value they had tremendous symbolic value. This 
was especially true of the legionary eagles.  
Two of these were apparently captured by 
the Germans immediately after the battle  
while the third was only found later amid the 
marshes where a legionary soldier had hid it.  
The standards would be taken back to the 
tribal homelands as symbols of victory.
But these weren't the only bits 
of memorabilia brought home.  
It seems that the Germans also collected bits of 
human bodies as trophies and talismans. While the  
mass graves from Teutoburg are inconclusive 
on their own, other burial sites across the  
region have missing bones, which are assumed to 
have been taken by the victors in other battles.  
The most prominent of these prizes, of 
course, was the head of Quintilius Varus,  
which was sent by Arminius to the Marcomanni 
tribe in hopes of bringing them to his side.  
However their king wished to avoid the inevitable 
wrath of the legions and promptly sent it on  
to Rome as a gesture of goodwill. He knew that 
Roman vengeance would come soon after the shock,  
and that they would have no mercy for those 
who had committed such an act of aggression.
Indeed, the Roman response came quickly. Once 
Augustus had shaken off the shock of the news  
he immediately ordered his most capable general, 
Tiberius, to lead a campaign of retribution.  
He was an excellent choice of a commander who had 
just put down the massive Illyrian revolt and had  
extensive experience with both guerilla combat and 
germanic warfare. However to the dismay of those  
who craved immediate vengeance, Tiberius exercised 
his disciplined approach to war by methodically  
securing the border and slowly pushing into 
Germany rather than blitzing into the fray. He  
succeeded in re-securing the frontier but departed 
after two years with much left to be done.  
Tiberius would be replaced by one 
of his most talented young proteges  
who would become known as Germanicus. As 
the agnomen implies, he would achieve great  
things in Germania with a series of campaigns 
that finally avenged the fallen of Teutoburg.
One of the most striking moments of this 
saga occurs when Germanicus led the Roman  
army back to the site of battle. Here 
is how Tacitus describes the event:
"A passionate desire burned in the Caesar to pay 
the last tribute to the fallen and their leader,  
and the whole army present with him were 
stirred to pity at the thought of their kindred,  
of their friends, and of the chances of battle 
and of the fate of mankind. Sending Caecina  
forward to explore the secret forest passes and 
to throw bridges and causeways over the flooded  
marshes and treacherous levels, they marched over 
the dismal tract, hideous to sight and memory.  
Varus' first camp, with its broad sweep and 
measured spaces for officers and eagles,  
advertised the labours of three legions: then a 
half-ruined wall and shallow ditch showed that  
there! the now broken remnant had taken cover. In 
the plain between were bleaching bones, scattered  
or in little heaps, as the men had fallen, fleeing 
or standing fast. Nearby lay splintered spears  
and the limbs of horses, while human skulls 
were nailed prominently on the tree-trunks.  
In the neighbouring groves stood the savage altars 
at which they had slaughtered the tribunes and  
chief centurions. Survivors of the disaster, 
who had escaped the battle or their chains,  
told how - here the legates fell, there the 
eagles were taken, where the first wound was  
dealt upon Varus, and where he found death 
by the suicidal stroke of his own unhappy  
hand. They spoke of the tribunal from which 
Arminius made his speech, all the gibbets and  
torture-pits for the prisoners, and the arrogance 
with which he insulted the standards and eagles.
And so, six years after the fatal field, 
a Roman army, present on the ground,  
buried the bones of the three legions; and no man 
knew whether he consigned to the earth the remains  
of a stranger or a kinsman, but all thought 
of all as friends and members of one family,  
and, with anger rising against 
the enemy, mourned and hated. 
At the erection of the funeral-mound the Caesar 
laid the first sod, paying tribute to the  
departed, and associating himself with the grief 
of those around him. But Tiberius disapproved,  
possibly because he considered acts of Germanicus 
with a jealous suspicion, possibly because he  
thought that the sight of the unburied dead must 
have given the army less alacrity for battle and  
more respect for the enemy, while a commander, 
invested with the augurate and administering the  
most venerable rites of religion, ought to have 
avoided all contact with a funeral ceremony." 
Tacitus' account is gripping in 
its detail and evocative passages.  
However while we would do well to take 
his sensational tale with a grain of salt,  
it's one of the only remaining sources 
we have to go by regarding this event.  
Luckily though modern archaeologists have been 
able to at least confirm that the Romans did  
indeed return to the site with the discovery of 
8 mass graves identified as containing the bones  
of military aged men with signs of traumatic 
injuries. Even today, excavations continue to  
uncover more of this 2,000 year old tragedy and 
we will surely know more as the work progresses.
We hope you appreciated this deep dive 
into an under-covered aspect of history.  
Let me know if you’d like to hear more 
about the aftermath of other famous battles.
A huge thanks to the Patrons for funding 
the channel and to the researchers,  
writers, and artists who made this video possible. 
Thanks for watching and see you in the next one.
