It's interesting what happens with you when you're on the line.
Because it forces you to be in the moment. You're in such a specific and strange place
that your mind doesn't really comprehend what is going on, so
Whenever you're calm, the line is calm and the line will move with you.
But whenever you're stressed, the line will get really shaky and it will kick you off.
First of all, you obviously see a spot that you want to go highlining in.
you see an opportunity and you start preparing, you start thinking about
what kind of materials do you need to rig this line.
Because every single line is different and every single line has to be rigged different.
And I really already get into the zone when I'm in my gear shed.
I like rigging early in the morning, just because...
The only things around you are the trees the birds singing and, there are no people around.
You really get into the zone of being one with nature.
And then, when the line is there when it's all rigged and you're done
you can wake up on the line. You can start off your day so nicely.
So, about 10 years ago...
I got raped...
And I fell into a really bad depression and a post-traumatic stress disorder
with panic attacks and really depressing feelings.
And I was searching for something that challenged me again and gave me a purpose of life again. Because before...
I felt like every day was a good day to die.
When I found slacklining, I found something I enjoyed
I found something I was good at and it gave me confidence.
It gave me a purpose of living again.
And it didn't only give me confidence in the slackline world but also in the rest of my life.
It gave me confidence to live again and it made me comfortable with my body. 
Whenever you're on a slackline, your thoughts go blanc. There is no room for thoughts.
The good ones or the bad ones.
And, it made me feel free. I didn't have bad thoughts anymore.
I saw some people in the park slacklining, and I just asked them if I could try.
And from that moment on, it went really fast. I felt really comfortable on the line.
And about two weeks after I walked my first line, I went on a highline.
So when I was sitting on that highline, I felt really comfortable.
Even though it was shaking and I was high above the ground.
I was really scared of standing up because I knew I would immediately fall.
That was a process of believing in yourself knowing you are able to stand up and just walk a line.
It makes me so calm...
It makes me feel like I can do anything and I can conquer anything.
