Fake mugshots, knocked off millions,  
and a horrifying body count. You caught 
the dramatic doc, but did you get the  
full story? Reckless boozehound to murder 
for hire, here's what Netflix left out!
The Netflix documentary, "Murdaugh Murders:  
A Southern Scandal," devotes itself to the 2019 
boat crash that killed Mallory Beach. Three  
couples — Anthony Cook and Mallory Beach, Connor 
Cook and Miley Altman, and Morgan Doughty and  
Paul Murdaugh — went out on the Murdaugh family 
boat to a party. They started heading back home  
around midnight. But despite Paul being highly 
intoxicated, he wouldn't let anyone else drive.
Episode 2 opens just hours after the crash as 
rescuers frantically search for Mallory. The  
other passengers — except for Mallory's boyfriend 
Anthony who remained at the scene — were rushed  
to the hospital. There, while placed in 
restraints, Paul's blood alcohol level was  
confirmed to be over three times the legal limit. 
Morgan's mom Diane claimed a nurse warned her:
"'I'm not supposed to say this to you, but Paul,  
he's a nasty drunk and you need to get 
away from him as fast as you can.'"
But what wasn't mentioned was how Paul 
was apparently laughing and hitting on  
the nurses. According to the HBO docuseries 
"Low Country: The Murdaugh Dynasty," Paul's  
behavior in the hospital was shocking. 
He appeared unfazed by the tragedy,  
and was seemingly unconcerned about his missing 
friend and the consequences that awaited him.
The Netflix doc  
details the many ways in which Alex Murdaugh 
reportedly tried to get his son's friend Connor  
to be named as the driver of the boat, rather 
than Paul. This ranges from instructing the  
kids not to answer questions and say they 
"don't know" who was driving the boat,  
to claiming to legally represent them 
all, to even contacting Connor's parents.
"And so that night, I'm worried about finding my  
child and they're worried about how 
they're gonna cover up Paul driving."
What the series doesn't mention is 
that Alex is said to have recommended  
attorney Cory Fleming for Connor and his family.
But Cory Fleming is a good friend and 
former college roommate of Alex's — a  
connection that the Cook family was unaware 
of. It would surely be a conflict of interest  
for someone closely tied to the Murdaughs 
to represent the person Alex wanted to take  
the blame. Fleming would later be indicted as a 
co-conspirator in Alex's many financial crimes.
"He already had the plan in 
motion. And we fell for it."
"Mm-hmm."
It was two months after the death of Mallory 
Beach when Paul Murdaugh was charged with  
three felonies; one count of driving a water 
vehicle under the influence resulting in death,  
and two counts of boating under the 
influence resulting in great bodily injury.
But while the Netflix doc provides evidence of 
various parties questioning why Paul hadn't been  
booked into jail yet, it doesn't make clear 
that this actually never happened. Even after  
Paul's indictment, it took an additional 
month before the charges were brought up.
There are statements from his friends' parents 
about how he was never handcuffed. Mallory's  
mother even recounts how his mugshot was taken 
of him in a nice shirt. And while all of that  
is true, it's shocking to discover that Paul 
never even set foot in the police station. He  
was never booked at all. And that mugshot? It 
was taken against a wall outside the courtroom.
Another way Paul was  
apparently given what's referred to as the quote 
"gentleman's treatment" is that the judge who set  
his bond denied the prosecution's request for Paul 
to wear an alcohol monitor. Given that Paul was  
charged with three felonies committed while under 
the influence, this was seen by many as gross  
neglect of duty. It was even brought up on Twitter 
using the hashtag "Souths Good Ol Boy System."
"He never went behind bars, he never had 
handcuffs, never wore the orange suit."
Not only did Paul get sent home to 
wait indefinitely for a criminal trial,  
but he reportedly continued to drink and 
party like nothing ever happened. Paul's  
former girlfriend Morgan says she saw Snapchat 
stories and other social media posts of people  
still partying with Paul. A monitor — which the 
Netflix series never addresses — would have at  
the very least ensured that this underage teen 
was not continuing to abuse alcohol illegally.
It's not until Episode 2 of the Netflix series  
that the main events are discussed in detail. The 
show provides the audio of the 911 call Alex made,  
as well as Alex's timeline of his movements that 
night. But it leaves out significant details.
Reported problems in the Murdaughs' marriage 
are noted, as are the rumors that Maggie had  
hired a forensic accountant and maybe even 
met with a divorce attorney. But the episode  
doesn't reveal that Maggie wasn't living 
at the Moselle house at the time. Instead,  
she had been staying at their beach house in 
Edisto, far from Alex. So why was she at Moselle?
The HBO doc "Low Country" explains that 
Maggie had been living at the beach house,  
but that on June 7, Alex texted her, 
asking to meet up. She apparently even  
discussed the worrying texts with her sister, 
saying Alex was, quote, "up to something."
At the trial, Maggie's sister testified 
that Alex's father was hospitalized  
and that Alex claimed his dad needed 
Maggie's support. After hearing this,  
she agreed to meet him at the Moselle 
house. She was killed that night.
Netflix covers how the survivors of the 2019 
boat crash were each asked to provide an alibi  
for the night of the murder, and how they 
were all cleared of suspicion. But even so,  
the crash was continually linked to 
the murders by many different sources.
"Think this may very well be related 
to the death of Mallory Beach. What  
was the motivation other than anger or revenge?"
But in the "20/20" episode "Murdaugh 
Family Murders," it becomes clear  
why people initially assumed that 
these two events would be related:  
Alex. There's extensive footage 
from Alex at the murder scene,  
in which he frequently mentions the boat crash and 
claims it's the reason his wife and son are dead.
The episode also shows the very 
first interview Alex gave to State  
Law Enforcement. He again brings up the 
crash in connection with the murders,  
saying that Paul had been threatened and targeted. 
Then, when Alex took the stand on February 23,  
2021 his attorney played the 911 call in 
which Alex named the threats regarding the  
crash as the motive. Appearing to 
dictate the narrative, he laments,
"Paw Paw. I should've known."
According to the Netflix doc, two weeks into 
investigating the murders of Paul and Maggie  
Murdaugh, State Law Enforcement reopened the 
case of Stephen Smith's death. Killed in 2015,  
19-year-old Smith was found lying in the middle 
of a road with head injuries. While Alex's oldest  
son, Buster Murdaugh, was mentioned in 
connection with the case, it never led  
anywhere. Stephen's death was labeled 
a hit-and-run, and the case was closed.
"This is not a wreck. This is a murder."
But what the HBO doc reveals is that the only 
reason the coroner called it a hit-and-run is  
because Smith's body was found in the road. 
State police are said to have found the death  
suspicious for various reasons; the complete 
lack of glass or debris at the crime scene,  
the odd position of the body, and the lack 
of injury anywhere else on his person.  
The Netflix show fails to mention that the 
coroner seemingly ignored all this evidence.
Yes, there's an indication that the 
investigation was rushed or covered  
up on behalf of the Murdaughs. But 
the HBO version actually backs this  
up with a statement from Stephen Smith's 
mother. Sandy Smith says that the morning  
Stephen's body was found, Alex's oldest 
brother offered to represent the family.
"Before the sheriff came in, 
Randy Murdaugh was calling."
On September 4, 2021,  
three months after the murders of Maggie and Paul, 
Alex Murdaugh called 911 again. This time, he said  
he'd been shot in the head by an unknown man who 
stopped to help him change his tire. The Netflix  
miniseries addresses the particulars of this 
case, but it leaves out some crucial information.
Alex's injury is listed in the police report 
as a superficial gunshot wound to the head,  
which would seem to corroborate Alex's story. But 
a guest on "20/20" said that the medical report  
revealed the wounds weren't from a gunshot at 
all. Instead, they were likely due to a fall.
Another item left out of the Netflix 
series is how there were 10 shell  
casings found at the scene, which 
doesn't add up to Alex's story at  
all. It was soon revealed that Alex had 
asked his cousin, Curtis "Eddie" Smith,  
to shoot him. Smith confirmed to "20/20" that the 
request was made, but that he never hurt Alex.
"He said, 'I need you to kill me.' I 
said, 'Yeah, that ain't happening.'  
And I figured I was gonna try to scare some sense into him, and I shot the gun up in the air."
On September 6, 2021,  
Alex Murdaugh announced that he was resigning 
from his law firm and entering rehab. He would  
later reveal an opioid addiction. But the 
firm swiftly contradicted this story. The  
law firm was founded in 1910 by Randolph 
Murdaugh Sr., Alex's great-grandfather.  
Netflix mentions the trip to rehab briefly, 
but "20/20" goes into much more detail.
"If anyone wants to see the face of what 
opioid addiction does, you're looking at it."
Mere hours after Alex's statement about 
entering rehab, the firm released its  
own statement saying that Murdaugh 
didn't resign as he claims. Instead,  
he was asked to leave on September 3rd 
— the day before his bizarre roadside  
shooting — because he had misappropriated 
funds from clients and the firm alike.
According to "20/20," Alex was briefly 
removed from rehab to be charged in the  
shooting hoax. He was then charged with 
the theft of the Satterfield settlement.  
The day Alex left rehab, he was charged 
with the murders of his wife and son.
What the Netflix doc doesn't get  
into is just how many financial crimes Alex 
Murdaugh has been accused of. The memo from  
the law firm stating he had been misappropriating 
funds opened the door to dozens of incidents where  
Alex defrauded his clients or embezzled money from 
his firm. All in, it totalled millions of dollars.
A whopping 99 charges have been filed 
related to these findings. But the crimes  
also seemingly provide a motive for the 
deaths of Paul and Maggie. Paul's boating  
accident in 2019 had yet to go to trial, 
but a civil case against him on behalf of  
the Beach family was progressing. A hearing 
was scheduled for June 10 — just three days  
after Paul and Maggie were murdered. That 
hearing was to request an accounting of  
the family's financial records, which 
Alex presumably didn't want to release.
Beach family attorney Mark Tinsley 
told "20/20" that after the murders,  
the hearing was indefinitely canceled. 
And if Maggie was also filing for divorce,  
then Alex's finances would have been 
scrutinized in that scenario, as well.
One of the most egregious of Alex  
Murdaugh's financial crimes is the one perpetrated 
against the family of his former housekeeper,  
Gloria Satterfield. The Netflix series 
covers Satterfield's long relationship  
with the Murdaughs, as well as her death in 2018. 
Satterfield reportedly fell and hit her head on  
brick steps at the home. But the inconsistency 
in the accounting of the incident was troubling.
Alex claimed to be at the scene, talking 
to Gloria, claiming she told him the dogs  
tripped her. But during the 911 call, 
Paul and Maggie's voices are evident,  
but Alex's is not. Witness statements also 
reveal that Alex wasn't there at the time  
of the fall and that Gloria 
never regained consciousness.
"He said I want to make sure 
the boys are taken care of."
The Netflix doc also touches on the plan 
Alex devised to sue himself in order to  
collect from the insurance company for Gloria's 
sons — and his ultimate betrayal in taking the  
entire $4.3 million for himself. But what it 
leaves out is the ending to this tragic tale,  
possibly because filming had wrapped. 
Thankfully, the Satterfield sons were  
awarded over $7.5 million in settlements 
from Murdaugh and his co-conspirators.
Netflix had their  
series in the can before the trial of Alex 
Murdaugh began. And some damning evidence  
from the courtroom is missing from the doc. 
As noted by "20/20," one of the most powerful  
exhibits shown to the jury was a timeline. 
The prosecution's report included GPS data,  
steps data, and second-by-second records 
of all calls and texts between the parties.
Alex placed his 911 call just 19 seconds 
after he arrived at the dog kennels. As the  
prosecution pointed out, this wouldn't have been 
enough time to check the pulses of his wife and  
son — whose bodies were 30 feet apart — before 
he called for help, as he initially claimed.
Other evidence came from Paul Murdaugh's 
phone. One video showed Alex in different  
clothes than he was wearing when 
police arrived. And in a second  
video Paul had taken of a dog at the 
kennels just minutes before his death,  
Maggie and Alex can be heard talking in 
the background, voiding Alex's alibi.
"The State versus Richard Alexander Murdaugh,  
defendant, indictment for 
murder, verdict: guilty."
Jurors needed only 45 minutes to convict 
Alex Murdaugh on both counts. The next day,  
he was sentenced to two life sentences 
without the possibility of parole.
