Here we are in the SpaceX machine shop.
When Elon Musk founded SpaceX in 2002, 
he only had two things going for him. 
  
SpaceX basically consisted of carpet and 
a mariachi band. That’s all of SpaceX.
Well, he did have one more thing: 
an ambition that knew no bounds. 
  
The sky is not the limit for Elon, 
whose mission is to send people to Mars.
On April 20, 2023 - humanity took 
one step closer to that dream.
When the world’s largest rocket, 
the fully reusable Starship,  
attempted to go into orbit for the first time.
Obviously, this isn’t a nominal situation.
Although Starship failed to reach orbit,  
learning from failures is Elon's 
approach to his career building SpaceX.
And to think he built a rocket 
company with just a bachelor’s  
degree in economics and another in physics.
Elon, who has Canadian citizenship thanks to 
his mother Maye, began his undergrad studies  
at Queen's University in Kingston, 
Ontario, three hours east of Toronto.
He chose Queen’s over Canada’s University 
of Waterloo, which is renowned for its  
engineering program, because, as he told 
Queen’s magazine, “there didn’t seem to be  
any girls (at Waterloo)! I didn’t want to spend 
my undergraduate time with a bunch of dudes.”
  
After two years at Queen’s, he transferred 
to the University of Pennsylvania as he  
thought attending an Ivy League school 
might help him land a job in America. 
  
The land of opportunity when it comes to tech.  
  
Still, degrees in economics and physics 
weren’t enough to make him a rocket scientist.
So, Elon taught himself by 
devouring these books. 
  
A habit he built as a boy,  
reading the entire Encyclopedia when 
he was only eight or nine years old.
He also absorbed knowledge 
from the industry’s best.
He cold-called aerospace consultant Jim 
Cantrell who answered while driving in  
his convertible with the roof down. 
He thought he heard Elon introduce  
himself as an “Internet billionaire”, as 
he recalled in an interview with Esquire.
  
Elon wasn’t quite a billionaire then, 
but he did score $180 million when his  
financial services company X.com merged 
with PayPal, which was bought by eBay. 
  
He then sunk EVERYTHING into three projects: 
$100 million into SpaceX, $70 million into Tesla,  
and $10 million into solar energy company 
SolarCity, which later merged with Tesla.
In 2001, he planned on buying 
a refurbished intercontinental  
ballistic missile (ICBM) from the 
Russians to use as a launch vehicle.
He figured his space ambitions could  
start with sending some mice to Mars. 
 
When he went to Moscow to negotiate, the  
Russians wanted $8 million per ICBM, 
twice what Elon was prepared to pay. 
 
  
When he countered with $8 million for two rockets, 
Jim Cantrell recalled in Ashlee Vance’s biography  
on Elon, that the Russians reportedly 
“‘said something like, ‘Young boy. No”.
Elon apparently “stormed out of the meeting.”
 
On the flight home, he broke down the cost  
of building and launching a 
rocket on a spreadsheet. 
  
He realized a modest-sized rocket 
that could carry smaller satellites  
and research payloads into space 
could be much less than $8 million. 
  
So, SpaceX was born with the goal 
of building its own rockets. 
  
It is an understatement to say 
starting a rocket company is hard. 
  
But Elon found an ally in the godfather 
of rocket science, Tom Mueller.
Tom worked for the large 
aerospace company TRW at the time,  
which Northrop Grumman later acquired.  
 
He spent weekends building and firing rockets  
in the Mojave Desert in California 
as part of an amateur rocket club. 
  
The amateur rocket scene was tight, 
and Tom got introduced to Elon.
  
Tom designed the Merlin engine 
that powers SpaceX’s rockets.  
  
Merlin revolutionized spaceflight 
as it’s designed to be re-used.
Elon understood that the only way to open up space  
to everyone was to drastically cut 
costs by building reusable rockets.
The Falcon 9 is partially re-usable 
as the booster lands back on earth.
Before the Falcon 9, there was the Falcon 1.
The Falcon 1 attempted to reach orbit 
for the first time in March 2006. 
  
It lasted only 41 seconds in the air 
before crashing due to a fuel leak. 
  
The second attempt the following 
year went slightly better,  
but the rocket failed to reach 
orbit due to a chain of issues  
caused by an unexpected bump when the 
first and second stages separated. 
  
Third time wasn’t a charm, either, as a 
timing error caused the two stages to collide.
Elon had run through all the 
money he had set aside for SpaceX.
When you had that third failure in a row, 
did you think, "I need to pack this in"? 
Never.
Why not? 
I don't ever give up. I mean, I'd have 
to be dead or completely incapacitated.
He told his employees to keep going.
The then head of talent acquisiition 
at SpaceX, Dolly Singh, recalled on  
the question-and-answer site Quora, Elon 
said: “...we need to pick ourselves up,  
and dust ourselves off, because we 
have a lot of work to do. Then he said,  
with as much fortitude and ferocity 
as he could muster…“"For my part,  
I will never give up and I mean never,” and 
that if we stick with him, we will win.”
“I think most of us would have followed him 
into the gates of hell carrying suntan oil  
after that. It was the most impressive display 
of leadership that I have ever witnessed.”
  
While Elon tried to save SpaceX, 
Tesla was hanging on by a thread.
He joined Tesla in its infancy 
after sinking millions from his  
PayPal earnings and stepped into the 
role as the company’s board chair.
After numerous management changes,  
he was left in charge as CEO in late 2008 
at a time when Tesla was in serious trouble.
The production of the first vehicle, the 
sporty Roadster, went wayyy over budget. 
  
By October 2008, Tesla had just $9 
million left to fund the company.
  
It was hard to convince investors to 
fork over millions more during the  
worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
His personal life fared no better; he was 
going through a divorce from his first wife,  
Justine, with whom he shares triplets and twins. 
  
Elon has said 2008 was the 
worst year of his life. 
  
With SpaceX unable to get its rocket into 
orbit and Tesla nearly running out of cash,  
it looked like one or both of his companies would 
die, as he painfully recalled to Ashlee Vance: 
  
"I could either pick SpaceX or Tesla or split 
the money I had left between them. If I split  
the money, maybe both of them would die. 
If I gave the money to just one company,  
the probability of it surviving was greater, 
but then it would mean certain death for the  
other company. I debated that over and over."
 
It was like having to choose between two children.
Perhaps his difficult childhood 
shaped his never-give-up mentality.
  
He was bullied for years when he was 
growing up in Pretoria, South Africa. 
  
One day in eighth or ninth grade, he and 
his brother Kimbal were sitting on the  
top of a flight of stairs eating when a boy 
snuck up behind him, kicked him in the head,  
and shoved him down the stairs. Then a 
bunch of boys beat him until he blacked out.
The beating damaged his nose so severely 
that it restricted airflow, and he later got  
surgery to correct his deviated septum. 
 
His life at home was no less painful.
  
After his parents divorced, Elon opted 
to live with his father for a time. 
 
  
But he told Rolling Stone that his dad 
Errol “...was such a terrible human being.  
You have no idea. My dad will have a carefully 
thought-out plan of evil. He will plan evil.”
Elon found comfort in coding, sometimes 
programming throughout the night. 
  
At age twelve, he coded a space-themed 
video game called Blastar. A South  
African magazine published the 
source code and gave him $500.
  
The game was no marvel of computer programming, 
but it did hint at his underlying brilliance.  
  
He turned his science fiction fantasies into 
reality when he founded SpaceX at the age of 30.
Despite three failed flight 
attempts, an investment from  
a venture capital firm made it possible 
for SpaceX to attempt a fourth flight. 
  
The future of SpaceX rested 
on that fourth launch in 2008.
On September 28, 2008, the Falcon 1 lifted off.
9 minutes 31 seconds after launch,  
the rocket…reached orbit. 
 
Sstage separation confirmed!
The success saved SpaceX because 
it helped secure a $1.6 billion  
contract from NASA to resupply cargo 
to the International Space Station. 
  
SpaceX was out of death’s reach. But 
Tesla was still within its grasp.
As Tesla was running out of money, Elon 
devised a plan to keep his company afloat:  
he cut 25% of the workforce and leaned 
on friends to cover the weekly payroll. 
  
He managed to scrape together 
$20 million, including money he  
made investing in his cousin’s data center 
startup, which Dell bought the year before.
  
Investors agreed to match whatever 
he was able to get on his own. 
  
This new round of $40 million in 
funding saved Tesla on Christmas Eve.
It was the last hour of the 
last day that it was possible”
  
Tesla would endure many more years of pain 
after going public in 2010 at $17 a share. 
  
Although the Model S wowed the 
world, people hesitated to buy the  
luxury vehicle after it came out in 2012.
 
Elon turned his employees into salespeople  
whose job was to convince everyone who put down a 
$5,000 deposit to go through with their purchase.
When orders weren’t coming in fast enough,  
Tesla said it was temporarily shutting 
down its factory for “maintenance” and  
kept the real reason secret to avoid spooking 
investors and sending the stock plummeting.
Elon’s maneuvering worked.
In 2013, Tesla stunned Wall Street 
by posting its first-ever profit.
Elon’s goal had always been to build 
a more affordable electric car.
But Tesla simply couldn’t keep 
up with demand for the Model 3. 
  
Frankly, we’re gonna be in production hell.
As the saying goes, if you’re 
going through hell, keep going.
  
Elon promised to produce 5,000 
Model 3s a week initially,  
yet only managed a mere 800 cars a 
week in the first few months of 2018.
Tesla was burning cash as it tried to increase 
the production of its most affordable car.
Elon says Tesla was about 
a month from bankruptcy.
  
The situation was so critical that he 
slept in his factories to save time,  
and, he also said it was to 
suffer more than his staff.
He told Bloomberg: “Whenever they felt 
pain, I wanted mine to be worse.” 
  
The pain eased as Tesla found a way to 
claw its way out of danger once again.
Tesla managed to increase production and 
turned the corner as it entered 2020.
It has expanded from one factory in Fremoba 
nt, California, to factories worldwide.
Tesla delivered 1.3 million cars in 2022.
One of them was my own.
As I drove across Canada last summer, 
I couldn’t help but think that one day,  
electric cars will be so run-of-the-mill 
that they’ll just be called…cars.
I did notice that supercharging stations 
across the country were pretty empty.
There was basically no one charging beside me.
Yet charging stations will soon be getting busier.
Many countries, including Canada, have mandated  
that all new cars and light-duty trucks 
sold be zero-emission vehicles by 2035.
Not to mention other auto companies will now be 
relying on Tesla’s charging network, like Ford.
Elon has stressed Tesla must make its cars fully  
autonomous in which there is 
no human intervention at all.
That’s really the difference 
between Tesla being worth a  
lot of money or being worth basically zero.
As Tesla engineers work to improve 
its full self-driving technology,  
it wants to place that technology in a robot.
Optimus perhaps felt like a sideshow 
when Tesla first unveiled it in 2021.
However:
Those who are insightful or who listen 
carefully will understand that Optimus  
ultimately will be worth more than the 
car business. Worth more than FSD. 
  
There’s been arguably even more skepticism  
over Elon’s plan to ease traffic by 
putting Teslas into his own tunnels.
We’re still years away from 
seeing whether the Boring  
Company’s tunnels will be a visionary 
mode of transportation or if there are  
too many holes in Elon’s plan - pun intended. 
 
It’s also too early to determine the potential  
of Neuralink, which received regulatory approval 
in May 2023 to test its brain implant on people.
Neuralink’s chip is meant to stimulate 
the brain and help those with spinal  
cord injuries control their computers 
and smartphones with their thoughts.
I think we have a chance, I emphasize a 
chance, of being able to allow somehow who  
cannot walk or use their arms 
to be able to walk again.
The long-term goal of Neuralink 
is to merge humans with AI.  
  
A common theme runs through all his companies.
The dream of freedom from Earth by going to  
Mars with the fully reusable Starship.
Freedom from fossil fuels. 
Freedom from traffic.
Freedom from the limitations of human biology.
And now Twitter is fighting for 
freedom of speech which he felt  
was being suppressed under previous leadership.
Twitter has changed its 
incorporated name to X Corp,  
to move toward Elon’s plan of transforming 
Twitter into X, the “everything app”.
That includes making Twitter 
a better video experience. 
You can now find my full videos 
on Twitter, plus exclusive tech  
insights I only share on Twitter. Catch me 
@Newsthink, or click the link in the description.
Although Elon has been building many 
of his companies for over a decade,  
their potential is only just starting to emerge.
Regardless of whether he succeeds 
or fails, he won’t give up. 
  
He once said, “When something is important enough,  
you do it even if the odds 
are not in your favor.”
  
