At the beginning of the 15th century, 
tensions between the Teutonic Order and the  
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth grew steadily. 
The goal of the Teutonic Order was to baptize  
and fight against Baltic pagan tribes. But as 
much of the region converted to Christianity  
over the past few decades, the original 
purpose of the Order diminished greatly.
 
Now, a new rivalry emerged between the Teutonic 
Order and the formerly pagan Lithuania,  
and its ally the Kingdom of Poland, over 
Samogitia, one of the last remaining bastions  
of pagan religion in the Baltic region.
According to the Treaty of Salynas,  
signed by the Grand Duke of Lithuania, Vytautas, 
and the Grand Master of the Teutonic Order,  
Conrad von Jungingen, Samogitia belonged to the 
Teutonic Order. This was extremely important,  
because this stretch of land separated the knights 
of Prussia from the knights of Livonia, and as  
such it was of significant strategic importance.
But the people of Samogitia refused to accept the  
Teutons as their masters, which lead to 
a series of uprisings against the Order.  
Grand Master Conrad von Jungingen responded 
with incursions into Samogitian territory,  
which resulted in looting and brutal 
reprisals against the local pagan population.
 
The Samogitian uprisings were secretly 
supported by Vytautas, but the Grand  
Duke could not intervene against the Teutonic 
Order due to numerous internal problems he faced  
within his own realm.
Conversely, in 1402,  
Shvitrigaila, the brother 
of the Polish King Jogaila,  
and a contenter for the Lithuanian throne, 
received full support of the Teutonic Knights.  
At the head of their army he then marched 
into Lithuania to overthrow the Grand Duke  Vytautas…
Despite the backing he received from the Teutonic  
Order, Shvitrigaila’s invasion did not enjoy much 
success and the army was forced to turn back.  
Vytautas had priorities of his own, so he was all 
too happy to make peace with the Teutons in 1404.
 
According to the agreement, Samogitia remained in 
Teutonic hands, while Shvitrigaila had to content  
himself with managing a piece of land in the south 
of the country – Podolia. With this peace it was  
also agreed that King Jogaila of Poland, also 
known as Wladislaw II Jagiello, would buy the  
Dobrzyn Land from the Teutons. And with that, the 
rulers could turn to their pressing concerns.
 
Grand Duke Vytautas and King Wladislaw II 
settled their accounts with the revolt in  
Smolensk, and waged wars against 
the Russian Grand Duchy of Moscow.  
On the other hand, Conrad used the peace to 
rebuild the previously demolished fortifications  
in Samogitia, but also to build new ones. He was 
helped in this by his former enemy Vytautas, and  
in return the Teutons helped him with the wars in 
the east. However, this peace did not last long.
 
In the spring of 1407. Teutonic Great Master 
Conrad von Jungingen died. Thanks to his  
diplomatic abilities, the Order’s knights 
enjoyed great success in recent years.  
But now, he was replaced by his not very skilled 
and militant brother - Ulrich von Jungingen. 
 
Mere months after the change 
of power in the Teutonic Order,  
tensions in Samogitia resumed. The locals sent 
letters to the courts of Europe, asking for help  
in ridding themselves of the Teutonic yoke.
In particular, the King of Poland and the  
Grand Duke of Lithuania kept a watchful eye. 
Having recently ended their internal problems,  
as well as the war in the East, they could now 
turn their attention to the Teutonic Order.  
The two rulers convened at Navahrudak, where they 
agreed to deal with the question of Samogitia,  
in the interest of the Polish-Lithuanian 
union. The plan was to support the uprising and  
provoke the Teutonic Order into declaring war.
In 1409, the second uprising began in Samogitia.  
By the summer of the same year, the Teutons had 
intercepted numerous ships sent by Wladislaw II,  
that carried aid to the insurgents. For the 
Grand Master Ulrich this meant only one thing.
 
On August 6th, 1409, Ulrich declared 
war on Poland and Lithuania.  
A swift campaign into the Greater Poland 
threatened a large number of castles.  
Weakly garrisoned, the Poles were forced to go on 
the defensive. Villages were raided and burned,  
and the Teutons managed to capture the 
castles of Bobrowniki and Bydgoszcz,  
while many others were plundered and burned.
With the Polish army unable to mobilize in time,  
the Holy Roman Empire intervened, brokering 
a truce. However, it was clear that war was  
inevitable. Both Grand Master Ulrich and King 
Wladislaw II made extensive preparations for the  
upcoming confrontation, building up their military 
presence along the shared border between the  
Polish-Lithuanian Union and the Teutonic Order.
The Teutons paid a sizable sum to secure support  
from the Holy Roman Empire. An even larger payment 
was made to the Hungarian King Sigismund, for him  
to lead his army into Polish-held Moldavia, 
to which he laid claim. In addition to this,  
the Teutons raised a strong army with the 
help of mercenaries from across Europe,  
mainly from Germany, Bohemia, and 
a modest contingent of Hungarians.
 
On the other side, Polish-Lithuanian 
leadership gathered a large army,  
primarily recruited from within the Union, along 
with a number of mercenaries from Moravia and  
Bohemia, while units from Moldavia came under the 
command of Voivode Alexander I, who also brought  
with him a contingent of tatar units.
Realizing the Polish-Lithuanian forces  
were too numerous, the Teutons took up a 
defensive position, hoping to deal with  
one part of the enemy army at a time.
But as the summer of 1410 rolled around,  
reports of multiple incursions into Teutonic lands 
reached Grand Master Ulrich. Information arrived  
that the enemy entered from the east and 
was advancing on Ragnit. Not long after,  
word came that Polish forces were moving towards 
Ostroda and that Bydogoscz was under attack.
 
The Teutons responded by sending smaller 
regiments to check the advancing enemy,  
while moving their main army to relieve Bydogoscz. 
However, these attacks were only a diversion. 
 
Polish and Lithuanian armies united their forces 
at Czerwinsk and had gone directly for the  
Teutonic capital, Marienburg. They left a trail 
of destruction, pillaging villages and churches,  
while many of the “Merits” were awarded to the 
tatar squads who were infamous for their craft.
 
This ruined Grand Master Ulrich’s plan 
to first beat the Lithuanian army,  
and then turn to deal with the Polish host. Once 
he learned that the enemy had invaded Prussia,  
he left a portion of his army in the West 
and quickly activated his forces in the East,  
so that he could stop the 
Polish-Lithuanian host at Kauernick.
 
But Wladislaw and Vytautas decided 
to simply bypass Kauernick,  
deciding that this fortified castle was 
not a convenient place to wage a battle.  
They continued east, aiming to avoid larger 
rivers that would present an obstacle.
 
The Teutons followed close behind, planning to 
block the road to the center of their domain.
 
On the morning of July 15, 1410, after a long 
march, the two opposing armies faced each other.  
On the right wing of the Polish-Lithuanian army 
stood the Lithuanians, made mostly out of light  
cavalry, led by their ruler, Grand Duke Vytautas. 
With them were probably Moldavian contingents,  
as well as the Tatars, under the 
command of Jalal al-Din, the contender  
for the throne of the Golden Horde. 
Positioned in the center were mainly  
Czech mercenary units, while it is assumed that 
Czech leaders Jan Sokol and Jan Zizka remained  
in the company of King Wladislaw II, who was 
immediately behind the center with his personal  
guard. Stationed on the left-wing were Polish 
units, consisting mostly of heavy cavalry. 
 
Polish-Lithuanian forces were divided into 
three lines, forming wedge-shaped formations.
 
Across the field, Ulrich placed 
his elite units on the left wing,  
against the Lithuanians, among whom there were 
Crusaders from different European countries,  
also known as the Guest Crusaders. Behind 
the heavy cavalry were cannons, archers,  
and infantry. Somewhat weaker units were 
placed on the right wing, backed by infantry,  
with the Teutonic camp further behind.
There are contradicting sources on the size  
of the two armies, but it is certain that the 
Polish-Lithuanian host had superior numbers.
 
Since Ulrich positioned his army 
before the Polish and the Lithuanians,  
he had an opportunity to perform a strong 
attack on the yet unorganized enemy army.  
However, fearful of falling into a trap in 
the expansive wooded terrain in front of him.
 
With neither side attacking, the 
battle turned into a waiting game.  
The troops stared each other down from a safe 
distance, standing in the hot summer sun.
 
Then… the Teutonic cannons sounded off, peppering 
the front of the Polish lines. But the bombardment  
abruptly stopped with the onset of rain.
Although not too efficient, the artillery fire  
was enough to provoke an attack by the Lithuanian 
light cavalry on the Teutonic Order’s left wing.  
Grand Duke Vytautas led the charge.
In luring the enemy, Ulrich got what he wanted.  
A rain of arrows was unleashed 
onto the incoming cavalry.
 
However, the Lithuanians did not take long to 
reach the enemy lines. In a valley surrounded  
by forest, a bloody battle ensued against 
the elite units of the Teutonic Order.  
The initial strike disrupted 
Ulrich’s battle order,  
as the first phase of the battle swung 
in favor of the Polish-Lithuanian Union.
 
The second line of Lithuanian cavalry moved up to 
help their comrades, but the Teutons also brought  
in reinforcements. The fierce battle raged, 
and gradually the Teutonic Knights regained  
the initiative, prompting the Lithuanian 
leadership to bring in the third line.
 
Meanwhile, the allied left wing, 
mostly made up of Polish heavy cavalry,  
charged against the enemy center and right wing.
 
As the bloody melee continued for hours, it 
became clear that the Lithuanian light cavalry  
stood no chance against the disciplined 
Teutonic troops. Ulrich’s counterattack  
ultimately forced the enemy to retreat from the 
valley, with the Guest Crusaders in pursuit.
 
Witnessing the collapse of their right wing shook 
the morale of the rest of the Polish-Lithuanian  
line. Czech mercenaries nearly broke and 
fled, but were stopped by their commanders. 
 
But, crucially, the Order from Smolensk 
managed to check the enemy in their sector,  
which ensured they could not be cut off from 
the rest of the Polish army. Their steadfast  
action protected the endangered right part 
of the left wing against a potential attack.
 
The Lithuanian cavalry left the battlefield, 
chased by individual Teutonic units.  
Only a small part of the Lithuanian force stayed 
in the fight to help the Polish right side.
 
Meanwhile, the sustained attack on the Polish 
line was aimed at the Banner of Krakow,  
one of the most important in Poland. Teutonic 
Knights hacked their way forward, knowing  
that by capturing this banner, they would deal a 
serious blow to the morale of the Polish troops.  
The Krakow banner briefly fell into 
Teutonic hands, before being recovered  
by Polish fighters in a rapid counterattack. 
As the battle continued to swing back and forth,  
the Polish leadership introduced the last of their 
fresh troops into the battle. On the opposite end,  
Ulrich observed the battle from the high ground, 
with significant numbers still in reserve. 
 
The Polish army was still in the fight, but 
seeing that Wladislaw was now fully committed,  
the Grand Master sent in the 
reserves to finish off the enemy. 
 
Instead of a direct attack, Ulrich 
decided on an interesting maneuver.  
With his troops he outflanked his left wing and 
drove the attack into the Polish right side,  
which was already in a terrible state. 
The target of this attack was none other  
than the King himself. One of Ulrich’s squadrons 
broke through to Wladislaw, where the King’s  
retinue fought valiantly to protect him, and 
Wladislaw himself took part in the brutal melee.
 
Meanwhile, more Teutonic 
contingents struck the Polish rear.  
Trapped in the massive crush from all sides for 
around four hours, it was only a matter of time  
before the tired Polish troops would give up.
But… around 1PM, war trumpets and thud of horses  
could be heard behind Ulrich and his reserve. 
The Lithuanian cavalry that had earlier left the  
battlefield had returned to help their comrades in 
arms. In another fierce charge, similar to the one  
that started the battle, they crashed into the 
Teutonic line, determined to finish them off.
 
To this day there is a debate about whether 
the Lithuanian retreat from the battlefield  
was a feigned retreat, or if the Lithuanians 
were simply defeated but managed to rally  
and rejoin the fighting. Whatever the case, 
now, Ulrich found himself surrounded inside  
the Polish-Lithuanian ring. While trying to 
fight his way out with his men, Ulrich fell  
in battle… for the Teutons the day was lost.
 
One part of their army managed to retreat, 
but many were cut down by the pursuing  
Polish-Lithuanian cavalry. The encircled Teutonic 
Knights, however, suffered the worst fate.  
All except a few men perished inside 
the ring that closed around them.
 
While sources disagree on the exact number of 
casualties, it is safe to say that thousands  
fell in the fighting, with the death toll 
especially high for the Teutonic Order.
 
After the battle, the Polish-Lithuanian leadership 
allowed their troops to rest before moving to  
besiege Marienburg, the capital of the Teutonic 
Order. However, the castle’s defenses were strong  
enough to fight off the attackers. But many 
other towns surrendered without a fight.
 
A large part of the Polish-Lithuanian 
army soon returned back to their homes,  
which the Teutons used to retake some of the 
towns. However, the Order suffered another  
defeat at Koronowo a few months later, 
and the Peace of Thorn was created.
 
According to the treaty, Samogitia went to 
Lithuania, while the castles taken by the Teutons  
throughout the war were returned to Poland.
The battle of Grunwald was a turning point in  
the history of the Baltic region. The Teutonic 
Order would not be able to recover from the  
losses they suffered and would never again 
be the regional force that they once were.
