The beginning of the story
My name is Walter White
and I am meth cook.
and for 10 years, I had the best meth in Alabama.
And if you wanted the best meth,
you had to come this way, you have to come to me.
 
10 years before the Breaking Bad premiered in 2008,
Walter White of Bessemer, Alabama, was already building a meth empire
and the drug was becoming an epidemic nation wide.
The primary ingredient that
is used to make methamphetamine is
pseudoephedrine.
But in 2004, federal restrictions caused incidents of
meth to decrease significantly.
A new law regulating pseudoephedrine
products will go into effect on July 1st.
The law will require users to visit a physician
and obtain a prescription
for drugs containing pseudoephedrine.
 
From 2007 to 2011,
meth incidents rose again,
doubling nationwide due to a surge in new methods
like shake and bake,
especially in small towns
like Bessemer, Alabama,
where, when industry declined,
drug use skyrocketed.
Now, I've seen em where they would
set up in hotel rooms and
they would have these little portable labs in their vehicles, and
they have become more mobile
from what I've seen.
Two meth busts in Tuscaloosa County have
resulted in five arrests.
Sheriff Ted Sexton says
meth labs are a growing problem in Tuscaloosa County
because they are easy to hide.
 
We are in Besemer, Alabama.
Its a bit of a ghost town here.
You have broken down train stations,
you have foreclosed houses,
and this is actually where the Walter White Lives.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
