Just try! I'll get you my pretty 
-- and your little dog, too.
Can you even have a great 
movie without a great villain?
...Okay, maybe you can, but 
it's not nearly as much fun.
I'm sending it back to hell where it belongs.
Were you in love with her beast?
And that's true even for non-Disney movies.
Human beings define their reality 
through misery and suffering.
Is this your king?
I'm your number one fan.
I won't touch Barton. Not until i 
make him kill you. Slowly. Intimately.
So it's no surprise that when a thousand 
film industry pros were asked about the  
greatest villain of all time their 
choice was Emperor Palp-- wait...
Good morning.
He's not even on the list??
Fools! Idiots! Imbeciles!!
Could they really not find space for a villain 
who emerged from across the gulf of time --
to settle an epic grudge --
hiding in plain sight --
until he could twist the hero of 
the movie into his personal pawn --
in order to enslave the universe to his will?
What exactly is being overlooked here?
Is it the scope of palpatine's plan
Because after, all a villain 
is only as good as his plan.
Do I really look like a guy with a plan?
By the time of the Phantom 
Menace the -- uh, phantom menace
is about to execute the next step in his 
plan to take full control of the galaxy
and no one has any idea.
They're all way too focused on the 
political process to see Palpatine's  
scheme unfolding right before their eyes --
Oh hey, maybe they could start a YouTube channel!
So his evil scheme... is he really 
wants Queen Amidala to sign a paper.
I have never known the plot of this movie until 
now, after having watched this movie for 20 years.
Okay... I don't get it
Imbeciles!!
Unfortunately, Palpatine isn't the 
type to just drop out of the sky  
and announce his plan to destroy civilization:
"You are about to die at the 
hands of the children of Thanos."
Why should he? He's got the 
Republic exactly where he wants it
and the Jedi think the Sith's return is --
"Impossible. The Sith have 
been extinct for a millennium."
A millennium is a long time 
to be planning revenge.
That would be like if the descendants of Genghis 
Khan came back now to take revenge on... Russia?
When the Sith went extinct, it was clearly at 
the hands of a dangerous capable Jedi order
and it sounds like whatever happened then 
is part of what created the Republic:
"This republic has stood for a thousand years..."
That's why the Jedi seem so confident.
And yet the Sith seem pretty 
sure of themselves, too...
"At last we will reveal ourselves to 
the Jedi. At last we will have revenge."
That's because the Jedi order has lost a step.
Now they're just an inflexible hierarchy making 
arbitrary decisions from a literal ivory tower.
"The Force is strong with him."
"He is to be trained then?" 
"No. He will not be trained."
Whatever they were before, there's 
little more than a ghost left of it now.
As Dave Filoni says, this sense that 
the Jedi have lost their mission  
is what makes Qui-gon's death so tragic.
"What's at stake is really 
how Anakin's gonna turn out
because Qui-gon is different than the rest 
of the Jedi and you get that in the movie
and Qui-gon is fighting because he 
knows he's the father that Anakin needs
but instead of that father, Anakin gets this one
"The Chosen One the boy may be,  
but agree with your taking this boy 
as your Padawan learner I do not."
"The rest of the Jedi are so detached 
and they've become so political
that they've really lost their way
and Yoda starts to see that in the second 
film but Qui-gon is ahead of them all
that's a failing for Anakin
he doesn't have the the family that he 
needs so he's left completely vulnerable.
"What will happen to me now?"
Palpatine steps into that 
role of guidance for Anakin
filling his head with a very 
different idea of destiny:
"You are the most gifted Jedi I have ever met. 
I see you becoming the greatest of all Jedi."
"I will be the most powerful Jedi ever."
And since Anakin's relationships 
grow increasingly strained,  
both with the Jedi Council and with Obi-wan
Palpatine is the only person who 
truly believes in Anakin's potential
"They've finally given you an 
assignment. Your patience has paid off."
In fact, he's essentially the only person from the 
entire Republic who's ever shown him any support.
"The republic's anti-slavery laws--"
"The Republic doesn't exist out here."
In many ways the Prequels are 
the story of an arrogant religion
who get a hold of the messiah and then 
accidentally hand him over to the devil.
The war doesn't go well, either.
What we get to see of the 
Clone Wars... is pretty sick.
There's a reason people wanted more of it.
Like a lot more of it
This is a really good show, by the way. 
I wonder why it's so -- oh that's right.
But for the story Lucas was telling, 
the only things that really matter  
about the Clone Wars are how 
they begin and how they end.
That's certainly all that matters to Palpatine.
You know the funny thing about this promise?
"I will not let this republic be split in two."
He kept it.
There were never two sides to the war
Of course it looks like you have 
Dooku and the Separatists and Grievous
versus the Jedi and the clones and the Republic,
but the reality is, all of these 
people are fighting for the same guy.
It was a proxy war. It was a sham.
A manufactured crisis that made 
hypocrites out of the Jedi:
"We're keepers of the peace not soldiers."
Destabilized planets across the galaxy:
"We are being held hostage"
And extended the range of Palpatine's control.
Listen to the music here:
This is the birth of the Empire
This is why Palpatine plunged 
the galaxy into the fog of war  
and made peacekeepers forget their purpose.
Politics.
And the Jedi just stood by and watched -- 
seemingly ignorant of the real game being played.
They totally missed the importance of -- uh wait 
it's here somewhere -- oh yeah: The Chosen One.
The Jedi's fate is inextricably 
connected to Anakin's,  
and who is the only person he trusts? Not them.
"My trust in them has been shaken."
But they don't see this. They 
don't see a lot of things.
They kind of look like idiots honestly.
"Chancellor Palpatine Sith 
lords are our specialty."
They don't notice when Palpatine uses 
Anakin to siphon their power away.
And when they finally discover the truth, 
they rush in in a very unjedi-like manner.
They just assume that it's gonna go the 
same way it did a thousand years ago.
And the Jedi council's rejection of Anakin.
"You're on this council, but we do 
not grant you the rank of master."
Comes back to haunt them.
When Palpatine activates Order 66
the Jedi who scoffed at the idea of 
the Sith's returning from extinction  
are annihilated in a matter of minutes
most of them never knowing how 
deep their failure truly went.
And now the path was clear for Palpatine to 
become emperor "with thunderous applause."
He promises the galaxy:
Although we get to see the fates of those who 
Palpatine previously promised security to.
"Lord Sidious promised us peace!"
Palpatine's final victory is 
almost unmatched in its scope
Revenge of the Sith is like a 
renaissance painting of judgment day
where the Republic's political and 
spiritual powers crumble into nothing
and its hero tries to murder his wife, 
before crossing swords with his brother,  
and being consumed by wrath
and when it's all over Palpatine swoops 
into hell like the angel of death
and Darth Vader is born
as the last person in the galaxy who still 
believes he has any good in him dies.
Who is Palpatine's competition exactly?
Satan?
Because that's basically who Palpatine is.
He dragged the most promising 
Jedi down to the fires of hell
returning him to the state 
of slavery he was born in
as a machine with a skull 
where his face used to be.
"And I'm telling you this 
finale it's unbelievable.
How tepid contemporary art seemed compared 
to the passionate quality of this finale.
So you have this like huge 
like romantic nature painting
the apocalyptic landscape of the lava.
Then Lucas cross cuts to the 
destruction of the senate chamber
and you have the destruction of industry going on
and then after all these 
horrors -- it is so beautiful
I'm saying my god!
Nothing in the last thirty years in 
any of the arts has been produced,  
as emotionally compelling and significant
as the finale of Revenge of the Sith."
In other words the only thing that 
eclipses the scope of Palpatine's villainy  
is the scope of Star Wars itself.
