As one of the lesser-known but nonetheless vital 
precious metals, platinum has a long history  
of being used for jewelry and ornamentation, 
reaching back to the ancient Egyptian empire,  
having been discovered on a coffin unearthed in 
Thebes estimated to be from the 7th century BC.  
Platinum is a metal that 
represents power, prestige,  
and a sense of great accomplishment. It has come 
to symbolize a high level of status in society,  
as evidenced by top tier credit cards 
and membership programs using its name,  
but platinum is so much more than just a status 
symbol. Modern day uses of platinum include being  
a key element in catalytic converters for 
vehicles, as it converts car exhaust gases  
into less harmful substances, as a catalyst in 
the chemical industry, and even in the creation  
of life-saving anti-cancer drugs. But that's 
just scratching the surface. On today's episode,  
we explore this exclusive metal that befuddled 
miners and scientists alike when it was first  
discovered. Dubbed platina, or 'little silver', 
by the Spanish conquistadors, the truth is  
it's so much more than meets the eye. Time 
to dig into platinum, on Commodity Culture.
Platinum is a gray-white precious metal and 
one of a group of six elements known as the  
platinum group metals. The other metals in the 
group are iridium, osmium, palladium, rhodium,  
and ruthenium. Platinum is the most common of 
the group and sees the most use. Platinum's  
atomic number is 78, it has an atomic mass of 195 
units, a melting point of 1768 degrees celsius,  
and is resistant to corrosion, 
stable at high temperatures,  
and has stable electrical properties. The name 
platinum comes from the spanish word platina,  
basically translating to little silver. This 
somewhat derogatory word was coined by Spanish  
conquistadors in the 16th century as they 
had no idea of platinum's uses or true value  
and considered it an annoyance that interfered 
with their attempts to mine gold. In those times,  
it was widely believed that platina was young 
gold and that given time, it would turn yellow  
as it matured but until then, better to toss it 
aside and get back to mining for the real thing.  
Platinum is rarely found on its own. It 
is often deposited alongside gold, copper,  
iron nickel, and of course the other platinum 
group metals. When discovered, platinum can be  
quite inconspicuous at first glance, with nuggets 
having a dull gray or black hue. One thing that  
can help identify it is its incredible heft when 
held and if iron is also present in the alloy,  
it will be slightly magnetic. Some of the first 
known platinum jewelry was crafted by the ancient  
indigenous peoples of Ecuador, with estimates 
placing their culture several centuries before  
the Spanish conquest of South America in 1492. 
It was particularly in the province of Esmeraldas  
where some of the most striking pieces were found, 
leading anthropologist William Farabee to declare:  
"The native Indian workers of Esmeraldas 
were metallurgists of marked ability.  
They were the only people who manufactured 
platinum jewelry." Considering platinum is  
far more difficult to forge and manipulate than 
say, gold or silver, the method these ancient  
peoples used to work such a problematic metal 
was nothing short of incredible and a testament  
to their dedication to their craft. Platinum 
fragments were coated with gold dust then  
heated by blowpipe on pieces of wood charcoal. The 
molten gold then caused the platinum to sinter,  
meaning coalesce into a porous mass through 
heating, which then allowed it to be forged. Being  
the rarest of all the precious metals, along with 
its incredible strength as the hardest among them,  
has led platinum to being one of the preferred 
forms of jewelry throughout the ages. In addition,  
it is highly resistant to scratches and other 
blemishes and does not wear away easily. Platinum,  
along with the other platinum group metals 
has strong catalytic properties, meaning  
it can accelerate or trigger a chemical process 
without becoming permanently changed or consumed.  
For this reason, it is employed widely in 
the manufacturing of catalytic converters  
for use in exhaust systems in internal combustion 
vehicles. Platinum present in exhaust systems  
helps curb vehicle pollution and contributes 
to enhanced air quality. Catalytic converters  
represent a whopping 50 percent of platinum 
demand each year. Due to its high melting point,  
platinum is indispensable in chemical laboratories 
for electrodes and for crucibles and dishes  
in which materials can be heated to high 
temperatures. In addition, platinum is used in the  
chemicals industry as a catalyst to produce nitric 
acid, benzene, and silicone. It is also used as a  
catalyst to improve the efficiency of fuel cells 
and for electrical contacts and sparking points,  
as it resists both the high temperatures and 
chemical attack of electric arcs. Platinum finds  
use in the electronics sector in the manufacturing 
of computer hard disks and thermocouples,  
is used to make optical fibers and LCD screens, 
turbine blades, spark plugs, pacemakers, and like  
other precious metals, is used widely in dentistry 
crowns, bridges, pins, and other dental equipment,  
as well as fillings, all employ platinum as a key 
component. But one of its most impactful uses to  
humanity is in the creation of chemotherapy drugs 
used to treat cancer, of which platinum compounds  
are an important building block. I'm willing 
to bet you didn't think platinum was such an  
essential element to our day-to-day lives but the 
truth is, it's a metal that is as practical as it  
is prestigious. Next up, let's explore the mining 
methods used to extract platinum from the earth.
Being one of the rarest metals on earth, 
platinum is almost never found on its own  
but is generally found alongside platinum group 
metals, nickel, iron, gold, and other metals.  
Although pure platinum deposits have 
been discovered, they are the exception  
rather than the rule. One of the earliest 
platinum mining methods is placer mining.  
Like gold, platinum particles can accumulate 
in alluvial sands in rivers and streams.  
Placer deposits are concentrated sand and gravel 
beds in streams and rivers created when old rock  
is eroded from its source and further ground into 
pieces as it is washed away by the water. Most of  
the world's placer platinum is found in Russia 
and back in the 19th century, alluvial deposits  
located in the Ural mountains were heavily 
mined by both small-scale family operations  
and more official mining operations. Placer mining 
for platinum was also common in South America,  
especially in the Rio de la Plata, or the river 
of silver, located between Argentina and Uruguay.  
Placer mining involves using dredges to scoop 
platinum-bearing sand or gravel from river beds  
and washing it until platinum grains or nuggets 
are captured and separated from the surrounding  
material. In today's world, the vast majority 
of platinum deposits are located underground  
and this is mined very similarly to gold, 
silver, and other underground metal deposits,  
namely, with strategically placed explosives. 
Miners drill holes into the mine walls and pack  
explosives into them before detonating the rock, 
blasting it into small pieces and hauling it up to  
the surface to be loaded onto trucks, which 
then take it to a facility to be processed.  
Most platinum mining in the modern era is done 
in South Africa, which accounts for a whopping  
80 percent of world platinum production. The story 
of the man who first identified platinum and began  
to make it known to the greater world is no less 
fantastic than the element itself, involving  
an adventure across continents, a capture and 
daring escape on the high seas, and a scientific  
discovery that would begin platinum's journey to 
becoming the dynamic metal we know it as today.
Antonio de Uloa of Spain was only 19 years 
of age when he was promoted to the rank of  
Frigate Lieutenant and sent on what would be a 
life-altering expedition to Quito in Ecuador,  
led by French geographers Charles Marie 
de la Condamine and Pierre Bouguer.  
Antonio departed Spain in May of 1735, not knowing 
he wouldn't see his motherland again for more than  
a decade. The mission was a monumental one, 
to help determine whether the earth was flat,  
as was popularly believed throughout most of 
human history up to that point or whether it  
was a sphere, as suggested by Sir Isaac Newton. 
To this end, it was necessary to measure the  
length of a degree of longitude at the equator, 
of which Quito was the closest city, and again  
it's somewhere as near as possible to one of the 
poles. An expedition to the far north of Sweden  
was also dispatched for this purpose but our story 
shall leave that journey to the pages of history.  
As Antonio accompanied the geographers in Ecuador, 
their task proved epic indeed and with great  
struggle, they finally completed their work around 
1745. Over the course of this decade, Antonio had  
plenty of time to explore the territory and the 
people there, recording his more interesting  
observations in various papers he carried with 
him. As the expedition finally departed back to  
Spain, their mission accomplished, Antonio 
must have been filled with strong emotions,  
as he was at long last headed home. Fate 
however, had other plans in store for him.  
As they made their way, sailing around Cape 
Horn, they were chased down north of the Azores  
by an English privateer, and their ship was 
captured. However, they managed an escape and  
as luck seemed to be on their side, they evaded 
their captors and seemed to leave danger behind.  
But God seemed intent to test their wills and 
as they'd reached Louisburg in Nova Scotia,  
their vessel was once again captured, this 
time by a British naval vessel and escape was  
out of the question. Antonio and his companions 
were taken to London and imprisoned, while the  
admiralty confiscated nearly a decade's worth 
of notes from Antonio's time spent in Ecuador.  
Things looked grim for our Frigate Lieutenant as 
he sat in a cell, awaiting his fate. But when God  
closes a door, he is known to open a window, and 
good fortune came in the form of the president  
of the Royal Society, Martin Folkes, who came to 
know Antonio and his story, and befriended him.  
The Royal Society were a group of 
natural philosophers and physicians  
and not only did Martin free Antonio from his 
chains, he got all his papers returned to him  
and even made him a fellow of the Royal Society 
in 1746. He was then allowed to return to Spain.  
Finally back after his long mission, he set to 
work compiling an account of his adventures which  
he published in 1748, first in Spanish and then 
had it translated into several other languages.For  
the purposes of our subject today, one passage in 
particular stands out: "In the district of choco  
are many mines of lavadero, or wash gold. Several 
of the mines have been abandoned on account of  
the platina, a substance of such resistance that 
when struck on an anvil of steel, it is not easy  
to be separated nor is it calcinable, so that 
the metal enclosed within this obdurate body  
could only be extracted with infinite labor 
and charge." Shortly after releasing his book,  
Antonio was tasked with a new mission by the 
king of Spain himself, King Ferdinand VI,  
to travel throughout Europe and study scientific 
developments across the continent. His travels  
brought him to Sweden in the autumn of 1751 and he 
was welcomed with open arms by Swedish scientists.  
Shortly after his arrival, he was duly elected 
to the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in  
October of the same year. During his time 
there, he met with mathematician and chemist  
H.T. Scheffer. Scheffer was a former mine and 
metal works manager, as well as an assayer at  
the mint, and so had quite a vested interest 
in metals. There is no official record of what  
exactly was said in that meeting, but shortly 
thereafter in November of 1751, Scheffer produced  
a paper titled "The White Gold, or Seventh 
Metal, Called in Spain Platina del Pinto,  
Little Silver of Pinto, its Nature Described," 
and submitted it to the academy. Scheffer was  
already familiar with platinum before encountering 
Antonio as he himself had received samples of it  
just a year earlier in 1750, from the West 
Indies, but his time with Antonio undoubtedly  
influenced his writing. In the paper, he came 
to the following conclusions about platinum:  
"That this is a metal hard but malleable, 
but of the hardness of malleable iron.  
That it is a precious metal of durability, like 
gold and silver. That it is not any of the six old  
metals since first, it is wholly and entirely a 
precious metal, containing nothing of copper, tin,  
lead, or iron, because it allows nothing to be 
taken from it. It is not silver, nor is it gold,  
but it is a seventh metal among those which are 
known up till now in all lands." In addition, he  
recommended a potential practical application for 
platinum when he wrote: "This metal is the most  
suitable of all to make telescope mirrors, because 
it resists as well as gold the vapors of the air.  
It is very heavy, very dense, colorless and much 
heavier than ordinary gold, which is rendered  
unsuitable for this particular use by lacking 
these two latter properties." Although attempts  
were made in the years that followed, platinum 
never found its place in telescopes of the era,  
although Scheffer would be delighted to 
know the metal did eventually find use  
in the construction of X-ray telescopes 
centuries later. Nonetheless, his paper sparked  
the imaginations of scientists across the world 
and a flurry of research into platinum began,  
leading it to be established as the multi-faceted 
metal that we know in the modern era.
Although the recent trend towards electrifying 
vehicles seemingly puts platinum's use in  
traditional gasoline-powered catalytic converters 
at risk, we need to step back and look at the  
bigger picture. In the coming years, auto-catalyst 
demand for platinum is actually likely to rise,  
as recent legislation to curb pollution from 
gasoline and diesel engines is boosting the demand  
for cleaner emissions, which is platinum's forte. 
Either way, platinum will have a role to play in  
a carbon neutral future as it is needed for 
hydrogen-powered fuel cell electric vehicles.  
These use a propulsion system similar to that of 
electric vehicles, where energy stored as hydrogen  
is converted to electricity by the fuel cell, and 
these vehicles are already becoming available in  
California and a few other places. Platinum is 
also playing a role in the greater energy economy,  
as platinum-based fuel cells are a cost-effective, 
clean, and reliable off-grid power source  
that is currently seeing use in some remote areas 
such as rural South Africa. These fuel cells can  
help provide greater energy access to communities 
who might not normally be able to get a steady  
source of electricity. This includes electricity 
for schools, improving the quality of education,  
and provides the ability to pump water for 
irrigation, facilitating agriculture. Its other  
myriad of uses also aren't going away and for this 
reason, platinum will remain an essential metal  
to our modern civilization for as long 
as we can extract it from the earth.
Commodity Culture is a series that covers the 
history and culture surrounding commodities  
and natural resources. If you enjoyed this 
episode and want to see more, please subscribe  
and hit the bell notification to ensure you 
are always alerted of the latest episodes.
