My name is Casey Jones, I've been doing parkour and freerunning for about five years
and I've been doing martial arts tricking for about two and a half years.
So, parkour and freerunning for those who don't know is pretty much going into an environment
and expressing or challenging yourself using obstacles around you.
It's really physically tasking and it's also mentally tasking
because you have to be able to see what you can do with your environment,
like "what can I do with this wall?" or "what can I do with this rail?"
So it's a very different kind of self-expression.
A lot of the time I get the question of why I would do this; what possesses me to want to jump from a fifteen-foot drop?
Everything in society nowadays is so pushy and edgy and people are always judging you.
Whenever you do parkour or do a trick, it's just so distant from that
because everyone in the community is so supportive and they wanna teach you -
it's all about love and I don't mean to sound cheesy but it's just so emotionally connected to who we are
that we love doing it every single second because it's the sort of passion and brotherhood that you get from it.
It's honestly an entire lifestyle change and you never go back from it.
We were at this tree spot at Ward Park which is a pretty popular spot here in Orlando
and this little kid walks up to us and he was like "whoa, you guys are doing flips, that's so cool!",
and this kid was like this tall and I'm sitting down so he's like, maybe seven and he just does a front flip and lands it perfectly.
Then he was like "man, I really wanna learn back flips" so we're like "alright, we could spot you on it".
This kid, before we could even spot him for it, just does it and perfect back tucks
and we're just so like "what!".
It was the greatest moment to see someone so young sharing in what we do
because I started when I'd just turned eleven and this kid started when he was seven.
When I was younger I had a pretty troubled childhood. My parents weren't really ever home;
they were always working so I didn't really get to see them a lot.
And that affected me pretty deeply and I got bullied throughout elementary school, you know,
and partial way through middle school until I started doing parkour.
It really got to me, but it all made me who I am and so that's important and all of this was learned over a very long path,
and I think the moment I realised that was the night that I got put into a behavioral center for about a week.
I was in there the second day when my mom came and visited me and the night that I went into the behavioral center,
my sixteen year old cousin Austin, shot himself over a girl, and it hit me so hard.
Everyone in my family was thinking that could've been Casey - that could've been me who pulled the trigger.
You have to enjoy life and be positive, and for me that's what parkour is all about.
I had a small birthday gathering because my parents pretty much said that "you're not having a sixteenth birthday",
just because they don't have time or whatever; I didn't really question it.
So I was like "alright, I'm gonna call up some friends", and I scheduled this birthday gathering for tricking.
David actually flew here from Miami just to be at this gathering.
We had a great day, and it was just tricks, all day. It was really great just being with my friends. 
I couldn't ask for anything else, I love all you guys very much.
Find your outlet. Parkour and tricking is just the most beneficial thing to me for it
because if I need family I have my tricking and parkour family. I can go to any of those guys;
I could go to Miami if I wanted to and stay the night at their houses for maybe 2 or 3 days.
I know that no matter where I'm at I always have a community around me - I have a family and that's so supportive for me.
It's just this big loving brotherhood between us all, and sisterhood now because there's more girls getting into the sports.
It's just such a moving thing to see so many people all across the world so connected by this one thing
and for all of you out there that have problems or even if you don't have problems, if you just need an outlet,
go try something new: try skateboarding, try BMXing, try wakeboarding, try all these things.
If you don't have the money for it, find a way. Go mow lawns, go hustle on the street, don't sell drugs - drugs are bad -
but just find a way because there's always a way to make success happen.
If you wanna go and skateboard, find yourself a board, or if you wanna try parkour just slip on a pair of shoes.
I don't care what shoes; you can wear Vans. Just put them on and go out there and try it.
For tricking you don't need anything - you don't even need clothes - you just go out to your grass and you try.
Go find a way to do this because in life if you don't try to find a way, you never will. You have to seek it.
Twenty-two stories.
I was out there.
