It's 1945, the days of Japanese conquest in the 
Pacific are long over, and Allied forces are  
advancing in the entire theatre. For two years, US 
Admiral Chester Nimitz’s “island hopping” strategy  
has brought the Americans ever closer to 
Japan. Only those islands deemed strategically  
significant are being be seized, while all 
others are simply bypassed. In November 1943,  
the Americans take Tarawa, followed by 
the Marshall Islands in February 1944,  
and the Marianas in June. The costly landings 
at Peleliu in September 1944 show just how  
bloody such island battles could become.
Hi, I’m Jesse Alexander and welcome to a  
special episode on Real Time History 
– the Battle of Iwo Jima day-by-day. 
US commanders selected the tiny island of Iwo 
Jima as the next target. Only 7.2 kilometers long,  
and from 0.8 to 4 kilometers wide, it’s an 
insignificant speck in the vastness of the  
Pacific Ocean. But since it’s located halfway 
between Tokyo and US airbases in the Marianas,  
Iwo Jima could become a vital support base for 
B-29 bombers, escort fighters and search and  
rescue craft. Importantly, Iwo Jima is also part 
of the Tokyo Prefecture and is sovereign Japanese  
soil. The Americans hope its capture will deliver 
a severe psychological blow to the Japanese. 
The US Marines’ V Amphibious Corps, consisting 
of the 3rd, 4th and 5th Marine Divisions,  
is assigned the task of capturing the island, 
codenamed Operation Detachment. All told,  
100,000 men and 700 ships will partake in a 
battle the Americans expect to last 5 to 10 days. 
Defending Iwo Jima are the 21,000 Japanese 
troops of the 109th Infantry Division,  
commanded by Lt Gen KurIbayashi TadAmichi. 
KurIbayashi has studied the battle of Peleliu  
closely and instead of holding the Marines 
on the beach - or relying on costly banzai  
attacks - he plans to allow the Marines ashore 
and grind them down in attritional warfare on two  
main defensive belts. Each consists of hundreds 
of caves, tunnels and expertly hidden pillboxes  
which the Japanese are to hold to the end. 
Kuribayashi’s “Courageous Battle Vows”  
order each of his soldiers to kill 10 invaders.
D-Day (February 19th) 
The preparatory bombardment of Iwo Jima starts 3 
days before D-Day - February 19th. This is much  
less than the 10 days requested by V Amphibious 
Corps Commander Major-General Harry Schmidt. 
But as the first Marines move onto the 6 landing 
beaches at 9am, Japanese resistance seems light.  
The biggest obstacle is a 4.5-meter high terrace 
of volcanic ash which hinders the men and prevents  
their supporting LVTs from moving ashore. Just 
as bulldozers are brought in to make a path,  
Kuribayashi unleashes his artillery. It’s been 
pre-sighted to bracket the landing beaches, and  
pounds the Marines, inflicting heavy casualties. 
Now, Japanese machineguns open up from Mount  
SurIbachI, a semi-active volcano and the highest 
point in the island. But the heaviest Japanese  
fire of all comes from the Quarry on the extreme 
right of the landing beaches. Even before the  
invasion, 4th US Division commander Major 
General Clifton Cates had worried about it: 
“You know, if I knew the name of 
the man on the extreme right of  
the right-hand squad of the right-hand 
company of the right-hand battalion,  
I’d recommend him for a medal 
before we go in.” (Leckie 21) 
By 11am, bulldozers have cleared a path from 
the beaches, and the Marines begin to threaten  
Airfield No. 1. Meanwhile, the 28th Marine 
Regiment moves to cut off Mount Suribachi,  
creating a tenuous blockade (1). Colonel 
Harry Liversedge reports on conditions: 
“Troops ashore and moving to isolate volcano. 
Resistance moderate but terrain awful.” (Allen 25) 
By the early afternoon fighting dies down, but by 
the end of D-Day, only a third of the first day’s  
objectives have been taken.
D+1 (February 20th) 
The Marines capture Airfield No. 1, 
but elsewhere it’s becoming clear  
Japanese resistance is stiffening. In the east,  
Marines grind up against the Quarry, while 
the 28th moves around the base of Suribachi  
and its 70 reinforced concrete emplacements. 
Kuribayashi tries to stiffen his men’s resolve: 
“Each man should think of his defense position as 
his graveyard, fight until the last and inflict  
much damage to the enemy.” (Rottman 157)
D+2 (February 21st) 
February 21st, D+2, brings the Americans a 
new enemy - the weather. Rain and wind shut  
down the beaches, while kamikazes attack the 
US naval vessels offshore and sink an escort  
carrier. On the island, the bloody fighting 
continues. In the west, the flatter terrain  
allows for the use of tanks and the Americans 
make better progress (2), but against the Quarry  
US casualties mount (3). One company of 240 
Marines is reduced to just 18 men fit for duty. 
Around 5,300 Marines have been killed or wounded 
in the first three days, so the reserve, the 3rd  
Marines, is sent in ahead of schedule.
D+3 (February 22nd) 
Things did not improve as the rain turning 
Iwo Jima’s volcanic sand into a sticky goo  
that clung to boots and fouled 
weapons. The 28th Marines reports: 
“Bad weather and poor visibility throughout 
the day hampered our operations considerably.  
The rain mixed with volcanic dust 
caused stoppages in practically  
all automatic weapons, reducing 
them to single shot...” (Allen 68) 
Nonetheless, the Marines push ahead. 
The 28th now begins to scale Suribachi,  
while elsewhere the Marines attack 
Kuribayashi’s main defensive belt (4). 
Japanese Defences
Kurbayashi has turned Iwo Jima into  
a complex network of interconnected and mutually 
supporting hardpoints of all shapes and sizes.  
Some are simple snipers’ nests made from natural 
cracks in the rocks, while others are large  
reinforced blockhouses that seem impervious to 
even heavy artillery. The larger bunkers are  
well stocked with supplies and facilities. 
Japanese soldier Tsuuji Akikusa recalls: 
“The Southern Islands Naval Air Station 
Headquarters bunker… was the largest bunker  
on the island, and it was rumored that it would 
be able to hold out for about three months.  
There were about 800 people in the 
bunker. There were no fewer than  
500 drums filled with heavy oil, light oil, 
gasoline, and drinking water.” (Akikusa p. 41) 
With the aid of tunnels, Japanese soldiers can 
move around the battlefield undetected and launch  
their feared night attacks, which increase in 
frequency with each passing day. As a result,  
after dark American forces fire lamination 
shells to constantly bathe the island in light. 
D+4 February 23
The tunnels also allow the 800-man  
Japanese garrison at Suribachi to withdraw to the 
north just as the 28th begins its final assault  
on February 23rd. After meeting light resistance 
on the summit, Marines raised two US flags on the  
mountain to signal its capture - and in doing so 
they create one of the most iconic photographs  
of the 20th century.
D+5 February 24 
But the capture of Suribachi does not mean 
the US has won the battle. The next day,  
US forces assault Airfield No. 2, but Japanese 
mines and anti-tank guns prevent the use of  
tanks. So it’s up to American infantrymen armed 
with grenades, flamethrowers and small arms to  
lead the assault (5). The Japanese stubbornly hold 
on at the north end, and US troops are only able  
to make serious advances in the west (6). Although 
the 4th Marines clear the Quarry in the east, they  
now clash against the toughest enemy position yet.
D+6 February 25 
On D+6, the Marines in the east enter the 
‘Meatgrinder’, a complex of Japanese defences  
centred on three locations: Hill 382, Turkey 
Knob, and a low basin known as the Amphitheatre.  
Defenders in these positions can mutually 
support each other with machine guns,  
artillery and dug-in tanks. American progress 
slows, with advances measured in 100-yard  
dashes – which the men call “touchdowns.”
D+7 - D+8 February 26 - 27 
The 4th Marines continue to struggle with 
the Meatgrinder over the coming days,  
while the other divisions also come 
up against their own hardpoints.  
On February 27th, the Americans consolidate their 
gains (7), but progress northwards is still being  
measured in ‘touchdowns’. The Japanese 
are stubbornly defending their positions,  
which often hold until US armor assaults them 
from point blank range, sometimes with Zippo  
Sherman flame-throwing tanks. American 
tankers also ram or churn their treads  
over cave entrances to collapse them. Japanese 
soldier Okoshi Harunori recalls his fears: 
“Even if you pretended to die and fell over, 
on level ground American trucks and tanks  
would drive over you… Some of the soldiers 
hid in foxholes to avoid being run over,  
but when the American tanks found a 
foxhole, they would roll around on top of it  
and crush the people inside. If they got you like 
that you were doomed to gurgle until you died.”  
(Shuzaihan pp.132–3)
D+9 February 28 
On February 28th, which US command originally 
expected to be the last day of the battle,  
victory still seems a distant prospect. With 
the east becoming a stalemate, Schmidt orders  
the 3rd Division to push in the center towards the 
coast, to split the Japanese defenders’ last belt.  
With the aid of a massive artillery and air 
bombardment, the Marines surge forward and seize  
the remains of Airfield No. 2 (8).
D+10 March 1 
By the next day, American forces are threatening 
the unfinished Airfield No. 3, while in the west,  
the 5th Marines now clash against Nishi ridge 
(9), another prepared defensive position.  
In the east, Hill 382 is partially captured (10), 
but the Japanese on Turkey Knob and Amphitheater  
continue to hold out. As American 
casualties and exhaustion mount,  
more and more NCOs take command of Marine 
units - in some cases privates lead their  
units in assaults.
D+11 March 2 
But just as US forces are making progress in 
the east, the central drive bogs down. Japanese  
defenders on Hills 362B (11) and C(12) are holding 
up the Marines, with the summits heavily contested  
in brutal hand-to-hand fighting.
D+12 March 3 
By the following day, D+12, a stalemate sets in. 
Marine casualties have been extremely high so far:  
3,000 dead and 13,000 wounded. The 
Japanese have lost 14,000, almost all dead,  
and only have about 7000 men left. In the west 
the Americans capture Nishi and Hill 362A (13)  
and fully surround the Amphitheater (14). 
As the battle continues, the Marines also  
begin to note deceptive Japanese tactics:
“[Japanese] Snipers dressed in Marine uniforms  
and armed with M-1’s [sic] were encountered, 
also, it was discovered that the enemy was  
booby-trapping their dead.” (Allen 153)
D+13 - 14 March 4-5 
In anticipation of future offensives, Schmidt 
now orders two days of rest except for smaller  
attacks to straighten the line. Fresh American 
replacements arrive, but many of them have no  
combat experience. Airfield No. 1 sees some 
unusual activity today as damaged B-29 bomber  
Dinah Might makes an emergency landing.
D +15 March 6 
The next day's American attack is preceded 
by a massive artillery bombardment – the guns  
fire over 22,500 shells in the first hour alone. 
However, their impact and the advance in general  
is disappointing from the US point 
of view. Fierce Japanese resistance  
limits the Marines to advances of only 50 
to 100 metres across the whole island (15). 
D +16 March 7
It’s become clear the Japanese are now well versed  
in the method and schedule of Marine attacks 
– an artillery barrage followed by infantry  
assault. So 3rd Divison’s General Graves Erskine 
suggests a dawn attack at 5am without artillery.  
Graves’ troops won’t advance straight ahead as 
previously, but into a Japanese sector facing  
the neighboring 4th Division. The Americans 
try the new method for the first time on March  
7 – and it seems to work, as by the end of the day 
they take Hill 362C (16). This advance started to  
create a pocket of Japanese resistance known as 
Cushman’s Pocket which continues to hold out. 
At midnight of the same day, senior Japanese 
commander Captain Inouye Samaji ignores  
Kuribayashi’s orders and leads a 1,500-man banzai 
attack from around Tachiiwa Point (17). He hopes  
to pierce the US lines, destroy equipment, and 
even scale Suribachi to raise the Japanese flag.  
But the Marines’ fire decimates his 
men, some of whom are only armed with  
bamboo spears or explosive vests, from 
range. The Americans suffer few losses. 
D +17 - +19 March 8 - 10
The wasteful banzai charge  
marks the end of major resistance in the east. 
Over the next three days, the marines bypass  
Japanese hardpoints in Cushman’s Pocket (18) and 
finally reduce the Meatgrinder (19). In the north,  
a US patrol reaches the sea before the Japanese 
push it back (20). Kuribayashi knows the battle  
is coming to a close, but he radios to Tokyo 
that he has no intention of surrendering: 
“All surviving fighting units have sustained heavy 
losses. I am very sorry that I have let the enemy  
occupy one part of Japanese territory but am 
taking comfort in giving him heavy damages.”  
(Allen 161)
FD +20 - March 11 
On D+20, Japanese resistance only exists in 
three isolated pockets: Cushman’s Pocket,  
the eastern coast, and part of the northwest 
coast. Kuribayashi now falls back to a gorge,  
later dubbed Bloody Gorge, with his last 1,500 
men (21). The Marines are exhausted and many  
are incapacitated by a psychological condition 
they call combat fatigue, today known as PTSD.  
So they call on the Japanese to surrender, and 
announce on loudspeakers that prisoners will be  
treated well and suicidal resistance is senseless. 
The Americans also distribute a translated letter  
from Japanese prisoner of war Momoda Hideo:
“Comrades, I myself would never have believed  
that things could be this way if I hadn’t seen it 
with my own eyes. At first I was embarrassed to  
have been taken by the enemy, but when I learned 
that several officers… had the same experience  
I felt better. In our conversations we agreed that 
it is more honorable to live for the Emperor and  
work for a greater Japan in the future than merely 
to die like rats underground.” (Sandberg 114) 
Messages like that one, though, have little 
impact. The Americans continue to advance and  
eliminate all Japanese strongpoints except for 
Bloody Gorge. Although US authorities declare  
Iwo Jima secure on March 14 Kuribayashi 
continues to hold out for 9 more days in a  
seemingly impregnable blockhouse. US artillery 
couldn’t be used for fear of friendly fire,  
so marines armed with flamethrowers, 
grenades, and demolition explosives  
take on the job of reducing it.
On March 23rd,  
Kuribayashi issued his final communication to 
the Japanese garrison on nearby Chichi Jima: 
“All officers and men of Chichi 
Jima, good-bye from Iwo.” (Allen 217) 
Kuribayashi’s ultimate fate is not known. 
It’s possible that he commits suicide,  
or that he dies in one of the banzai attacks that 
become more common in the final days. On March 26,  
around 200-300 Japanese troops sneak out of 
the Bloody Gorge and strike at Airfield No. 2,  
attacking mostly airmen and construction 
personnel. This charge, which US troops  
quickly destroy, signals the end of the battle.
It’s now D+35. Marine casualties are around  
23,000, including 6,800 dead, while the 
navy loses about 2800 dead and wounded.  
19,000 of the 21,000 Japanese troops on the island 
are killed. Only 216 surrender during the battle,  
and up to 2000 continue to struggle in small 
groups until they are mopped up by US troops. 
Although the later battle of Okinawa will 
prove even costlier for the Americans,  
Iwo Jima is still the deadliest single 
battle for the Marines, and the only battle  
in the US Pacific Campaign where American 
casualties outnumber those of the Japanese. 
Iwo Jima is also a battle with a controversial 
legacy. The US Army and Navy will later claim  
the operation was of little use, especially 
for the price paid. But for its intended  
practical purposes it does provide immediate 
benefits. Through the last months of the war,  
2,251 B-29s make emergency landings on Iwo, 
potentially saving the lives of 24,000 US airmen.
SPONSORSHIP + ENDCARD 
We’d like to thank Mark Newton 
for his help with this episode.  
We hope you liked this more experimental video 
where we tried out some new things with our maps  
that we want to use for our upcoming series 
Napoleon’s Downfall where we’ll cover the  
campaign in Russia in 1812. We could not deliver 
our kind of detailed history content without our  
supporters on Patreon. If you like what we do, 
please support us at patreon.com/realtimehistory 
I’m Jesse Alexander and this is Real Time 
History, the only Youtube history channel that  
knows for a fact that turkeys don’t actually have 
knobs. They actually have a cloaca. Look it up.
