The Badlands.
Home to some of the strangest creatures to ever walk this earth.
In our previous episodes, we’ve explored these arid lands
and examined the bizarre culture of “bots."
However, today we’ll be looking at some species
we may call, more…“uncivilized.”
In order to do this, we must look into a domain  
that greatly differs from the typical deserts of New Mexico,
and travel to their polar opposites.
Once serving as battlegrounds in the Great Gravel Wars,
these bodies of water have been reclaimed by nature,
and now house marine life.
This documentary will celebrate these few remaining bastions of wildlife,
and reveal what we must preserve,
to ensure people and nature thrive.
Join me, as we observe these fascinating aquatic 
animals in their purest, and most innocent forms.
Welcome, to the wondrous world of water.
Welcome, to the Great Blue.
Water is a scarcity in the dusty plains of New Mexico,
but a couple reservoirs may still be found.
Here is one of these oases, 2fort.
Accidentally built upon a massive freshwater spring,  
the rudimentary tunnel systems are flooded with the earth’s lifeblood.
Unfortunately, the industrial nature of human
 influence proves to be inescapable.
The surrounding forts have leaked lead into the groundwater, 
contaminating it,  
and making it near uninhabitable.
And yet, life goes on.
The Pyroshark. Scientific name, “Ardere Selachimorpha.”
Common name, “stupid.”
It is an evolutionary anomaly; a crossbreed between a common shark
and the single-braincelled organisms known as “Pyro Mains.”
Unlike most species of shark, 
this particular one has evolved to live 
within freshwater environments.
Curiously enough, there are no signs of any biological adaptations
that would allow the pyroshark to process fresh water.
The current running biological theory is that this unlikely cross-breed
is simply too stupid to realize it should not be alive.
This particular pyroshark is 
in its first stages of infancy.
The parents are nowhere to be found.
But not to worry!
The pyroshark is a precocial species, and aparticularly violent one at that.
It is born with all the tools necessary for it to survive.
A foolish tourist wanders near the edge, ignoring all safety precautions.
A decision he will soon sorely regret.
He slips and falls into the depths below.
Sensing a disturbance in the waters,
the pyroshark makes its way towards its next target.
A swift kill.
But wait! It seems that the pyroshark is not alone in its hunt.
A local school of piranha scouts contest the shark for his meal.
Small yet deadly, these piranha scouts will attack in groups.
The leader of the pack gets a swift first strike.
The shark retaliates!
A swing…and a miss!
The alpha piranha dodges and weaves, expertly evading 
the shark’s attacks!
The rest of the piranhas, seeing their leader effortlessly
 dance around the shark,
begin to gain the confidence to approach their next meal.
But suddenly…
A lucky strike by the pyroshark.
Like a pack of schoolyard bullies, the piranhas 
disperse after seeing their leader fall.
The pyroshark barely comes out victorious.
He retreats back into his cove 
to heal and fight another day.
We now leave the troubled waters of 2fort
to a more serene marine ecosystem.
In the temperate lands far to the east of the Badlands, 
we come across a tropical island.
Though not completely untouched by human influence, 
this lush bay is rife with plant life and animal life alike.
The beaches of Banana Bay remain relatively untouched year round,  
but during the summer months, the island receives visitors.
The turtling engineer. A species remarkable in its intelligence,  
far surpassing that of the pyroshark.
They arrive from deep within the depths of the ocean,  
colonizing the beaches quickly and efficiently.
While the turtle engineer itself is a rather soft and 
 defenseless target,
the turtle has evolved and developed an ingenious 
 defense mechanism.
A protective perimeter of sentry guns, dispensers,  
and teleporters is rapidly established along the coast.
These turtles are territorial creatures, and 
will guard their new lands with an iron fist.
At first, it is not clear why these turtle engineers 
have to be so protective of their territory.
The native denizens of the island are not 
particularly aggressive towards adult turtles.
In fact, it is quite the other way around.
The turtles are the ones who pose a threat to the island’s inhabitants. 
Any monkeys unfortunate enough to step too close 
to the beach are met with extreme prejudice.
Venturing deeper into the makeshift colony,
we soon see the reason for their nest of defenses.
Ah. The miracle of life.
The secluded alcoves of Banana Bay provide the perfect environment  
for the turtle engineers to usher in the next generation.
Once the turtle engineers have finished their business, 
they depart from the island.
The buildings are left behind, with the turtles putting full trust
in their machines to protect their eggs.
Over the course of the next 3 months, the buildings will break down.
However, before the buildings completely degrade, 
the turtle engineer eggs will have hatched.
Under the watchful protection of the sentries,
the next generation of turtles will have made it safely into the sea.
And of course, we would be remiss to not mention the 
 brackish waters closer to the mainland.
On this particular peninsula, a species of seabird 
 known as “Armoria Reskinia” thrive.
These nocturnal, semi-aquatic birds live and die by the ocean.
The sea is the provider of their sustenance,  
supplying a constant stream of slightly lead poisoned 
 mackerel directly to their doorstep.
Armoria Reskinia live in tandem with their urban environment,  
roosting on mann-made piers and using the elevation to help them dive.
However, fish is not the only source of food for these birds.  
Occasionally, a rare treat comes along.
An endangered spycrab foolishly peeks his head above the water-line.  
Long thought to be extinct in the wild, capturing one 
 on camera is a once in a lifetime opportunity.
Unfortunately, we cannot take any action in 
order to preserve the integrity of nature.
Another component of the birds’ diet is food
occasionally handed to them by humans.
A flock of avid bird watchers gaze upon the birds from a distance.
As mentioned earlier, Armoria Reskinia have adapted to their 
 urban surroundings.
Making the most out of the local tourists is one of these adaptations.
Resident wildlife officers have attempted to deter humans from  
feeding the birds in the past, but the attempts were unsuccessful.
Speak of the devil! It seems one of the tourists
 has chosen to ignore the warnings!
We will now observe what happens when humanity 
 comes into contact with the wild.
 
An alliance, most poetic.
Paralleling the stories of medieval falcon-tamers,
An olive branch of civilization extended towards the regal beast.
Um-
O-oh dear!
I don’t think this quite fits into our “G” rating.
C- Charlie!
CHARLIE!
Pull the plug! QUICKLY CH-
