In 1819, a group of soldiers was 
digging a pit in Lompock Rancho,  
California to search for a powder magazine. 
Working their way through layers of hard,  
compact gravel, the soldiers found something 
out of place: a 12-foot sarcophagus. While  
this in itself was already a strange on its own, 
something even more shocking was hidden inside it:  
a skeleton of a giant human, measuring around 
12 foot tall as well, or about 5 meters.
In the same area, the soldiers found artifacts 
that may have been buried along with the giant  
skeleton. Weaponry, semi-precious minerals, and 
shells, on which strange symbols were engraved.
To top it off, they found that the skull 
has two rows of upper and lower teeth.
Not knowing what to do, the soldiers approached 
a local Native American tribe for assistance.  
Declaring it to be a remnant of a deity, the 
wary tribe asked them to bury the remains again  
and never to disturb it once more. True enough, 
once the authorities caught wind of the situation,  
they indeed re-interred the bones secretly. 
Nothing was heard of about it ever since.
This story was told by a woman in 1862. 
Her husband was one of the soldiers who  
unearthed the strange sarcophagus with a giant 
skeleton. The area has since then been turned  
into a military facility. Nowadays, it 
hosts the Vandenberg Space Force Base.
The 1819 story was just one of the 
many accounts of the supposed giant  
skeleton discoveries all across United States.
Giant stories are abound in many 
mythologies and cultures around the world.
Wherever you go, there’s almost 
always a tale about a giant or giants:  
larger or taller than normal humanoids with 
immense strength and power. In these stories,  
they usually play antagonistic roles, 
hostile and even openly violent to the  
humans they encounter. From Goliath 
of the Bible, to Ymir of the Norse,  
and to the Gigantes of the Greece, there’s no 
shortage of these larger than life stories.
The Americas is also no stranger to stories of 
gigantic humans. From Paul Bunyan to the Paiute  
legends of red-haired giants, there is no shortage 
of giant stories, each as bizarre as the other.
Nowadays, we look back at these stories as 
nothing more than myths and legends. After all,  
it’s hard to imagine that such 
creatures of colossal size once  
roamed the Earth. There is also no solid 
and verifiable proof that they did.
Or was there?
Archaeological Findings of Gigantic Proportions: 
The Mystery of America’s Giant Skeletons
Since the early 1800s, sightings of giant 
skeletons have popped up every now and then  
all over the country, with some, even 
earning a space in newspapers. Dozens  
of articles regarding giant skeletons were 
in newspaper archives, town history records,  
and journals of important people. Some 
of them, you can even find online.
In just a span of 200 years, over a thousand 
reports of skeletons with a height measuring  
at least seven foot or 2 meters up to 18 
feet or 5.4 meters tall have been found.
As you can see in this map, some states 
in the country have higher concentrations  
of giant skeleton accounts than 
others, with Ohio, in the lead. 
An anonymous internet user also collected 
newspaper clippings and reports of supposed  
giant skeletons in a publicly available 
spreadsheet. Based on their collected data,  
here’s a chart that shows the states and some 
countries with the most giant skeleton sightings:
You can check out the links to the spreadsheet 
and the map in the video’s description.
While most of these have 
been chalked up to hoaxes,  
exaggerations, or misidentifications, 
others can’t be so easily dismissed.
Among these, are the few accounts 
that stood above the rest. Some,  
for its believability, while 
others for its eerie similarity  
to old Native American legends. Then 
there are those that combine both.
A 1947 newspaper also reported a strange 
account of a retired Ohio physician by the  
name of Dr. F. Bruce Russel. According to the 
article, Dr. Russel, alongside his colleague  
Dr. Daniel S. Bovee, was prospecting an area 
in Death Valley, California to look for mining  
opportunities in 1931, when he fell into an 
underground cave when the ground beneath him  
gave away. What he stumbled upon in that place was 
something he never would have imagined finding.
Because underneath that seemingly ordinary area 
was a complex network of catacombs and tunnels.  
Bovee joined Russel in exploring the caverns, 
only to find even more mysterious artifacts,  
bones of extinct animals, and mummified 
remains of giants measuring 8 to 9 feet tall.
Naturally, when Russel and Bovee told this 
story to others, nobody believed them. Russel,  
however, was persistent at first and even formed 
a corporation with the goal of exploring the said  
cavern network even further and profitting off 
from it. Unfortunately, they never found it again.
But the story didn’t end there. Only a short 
while after that, Russel disappeared. His  
car and suitcase was found abandoned in a 
far flung area in Death Valley. Meanwhile,  
his companion Bovee wasn’t heard of since the 
incident, as if he vanished into thin air.
Russel and Bovee weren’t even the only 
ones to tell such tale. In the 1920s,  
there was also another prospector, only known 
as White, who fell into a cavern and discovered  
evidence of civilization in the place. 
Later on, a Paiute native named Tom Wilson,  
was fascinated by White’s tale as it’s similar 
to his grandfather’s story. Wilson accompanied  
White to find the mysterious caverns but 
they weren’t able to locate it anymore.
A book published in 1932 titled Death Valley 
Men by a prospector named Bourke Lee also  
recounted the same story. Like the others, the 
men who visited the underground city vanished.
Interestingly, 577 miles away from Death 
valley, a similar story happened in 1904 to a  
British prospector only known as J.C. Brown. Like 
Russel, Bovee, White, and Wilson’s grandfather,  
J.C. Brown accidentally discovered a cave where 
he found not only treasures and artifacts,  
but also mummies of giants measuring up to 
10 feet or 3 meters tall. Strangely, Brown  
also vanished on the day he and an exploration 
team was about to set out to return to the area.
Stories of underground cities and giants actually 
have their roots in Native American legends. The  
Paiute people even have a legend about a chief 
who, grieving for the death of his beloved wife,  
wandered to the Death Valley and stumbled 
upon an underground city called Shin-Au-Av.
While this tale from the Paiute people 
don’t have giants on the surface,  
another one has a more direct mention of 
beings who are larger than normal humans.
According to a story told to mining engineer 
John T. Reid in 1886, the Paiute people once  
fought a war against a tribe they called 
the Si-Teh-Cah. The Si-Teh-Cah, or the S’ai,  
are a tribe of red-haired cannibalistic giants who 
terrorized the area. The Paiute people eventually  
emerged victorious and drove them away to a cave, 
burying its entrance to prevent the giants escape.
That place is now known as the Lovelock Cave.
A link to a detailed video about the Giants of 
the Lovelock Cave can be found in the description.
Unlike our previous stories, though,  
there might be some veracity to 
the story of the Si-Teh-Cah people.
You see, in 1911, two bat guano miners, 
David Pugh and James Hart stumbled upon  
the remains of the tribe. Beneath the 
layer of bat guano measuring 3 to 6  
feet were thousands of artifacts and 
remains that was clearly left there by  
a sizeable settlement. One sandal was 
even estimated to be 10,000 years old,  
which was even older than the recognized 
most ancient civilizations in the world.
And while there is unfortunately scant 
evidence that the tribe who used to live  
there were actual giants, one of the 
remains discovered in 1911 was that of  
a 6 foot 6 inches tall human. Not exactly 
a giant, but a little taller than average.
However, there was a catch. Not all artifacts and 
remains of that cave were preserved. The problem  
started when during the first exploration of the 
miners, only the objects they deemed interesting  
were saved. So, as misfortune would have it, long 
before any systematized digging was done, there  
may have been many valuable artifacts that were 
irreversibly damaged and forever lost to time.
It turns out that cases similar to 
this isn’t exactly uncommon. A lot  
of reported discoveries of giant skeletons 
all across the country mysteriously ran into  
an issue and were declared to be hoaxes. 
Granted that many might have been a hoax,  
there are others that makes you question 
whether there’s a deliberate cover up.
Mounds and Giants
Mounds are a sizeable pile of earth artificially 
constructed as either a burial or ceremonial  
site. A mysterious earthwork that confounded 
the ordinary folks and archeologists alike,  
mounds have existed in North America for thousands 
of years. According to estimates, there were 1  
million mounds all over the United States, but 
only a hundred thousand of them remain nowadays.
Even in the 1800s, there were many people 
who believed that a race of giants have  
actually built these mounts. Among these 
was Abraham Lincoln, who famously wrote:
But still there is more. It calls up the 
indefinite past. When Columbus first sought  
this continent – when Christ suffered on the cross 
– when Moses led Israel through the Red-Sea – nay,  
even, when Adam first came from the hand 
of his Maker – then as now, Niagara was  
roaring here. The eyes of that species of extinct 
giants, whose bones fill the mounds of America,  
have gazed on Niagara, as ours do now. 
Co[n]temporary with the whole race of men,  
and older than the first man, Niagara is strong, 
and fresh to-day as ten thousand years ago. The  
Mammoth and Mastodon – now so long dead, 
that fragments of their monstrous bones,  
alone testify, that they ever lived, have 
gazed on Niagara. In that long – long time,  
never still for a single moment. Never dried, 
never froze, never slept, never rested.
Interestingly, it was also during this time that  
accounts of giant skeleton discoveries 
were reported in various newspapers.
More intriguingly, two of 
them came from New York Times.
According to these two articles dating back 
1886 and 1897, skeletons attributed to a giant  
human-like creature were found in Cartersville, 
Georgia and Wisconsin, respectively. The Georgia  
skeleton measured 14 feet or 4.3 meters, while 
the Wisconsin one was around 9 feet or 2.7 meters.
While you can still read these newspaper 
articles in the New York Times website,  
strangely, there were no updates since of what 
happened to the two reported giant skeletons.  
It was as if the newspaper mentioned it once 
then decided not to talk about it anymore.
One of the most fascinating mound sites in the 
country, the Great Serpent Mound, also has its  
share of giant skeleton story. In the 1890s, 
Professor Frederic Ward Putnam found 6 feet tall  
skeletons near the area. While that’s not gigantic 
by any means, another researcher named Jeffrey  
Wilson rediscovered and photographed a 7 foot 
skeleton. Weirdly enough, the said skeleton had  
its lower leg and feet missing, which led some to 
speculate that it may have been taller than that.
More and more giant skeletons were found in 
various mound sites all over the United States.
One, in West Virginia, a 7 
feet 2 inches tall skeleton.
Another, in Miamisburg, Ohio, which was a 
skeleton of 8 feet and 1.5 inches in height.
Then, one in Iowa, measuring 7 feet and 6 inches.
The last one had reportedly crumbled 
to dust after exposure to air.
Don't miss the second part of this video 
where we'll go From the mysterious finds  
in Missouri to the skeletons purchased by 
the Smithsonian Institution and explore the  
mysteries behind these huge remains. Are they 
proof of the existence of ancient giant races,  
or are they simply the product of myths 
and hoaxes? You'll find out more about  
the controversies and theories that divide 
scientists and enthusiasts. Get ready for  
a journey into the past that promises to 
reveal secrets long kept in the silence  
of history. The next episode will 
present new views and revelations  
that may change the way we see our distant past.
Deepen your adventure by watching our playlists! 
And if you want more? Just play the next episode 
that comes up as a suggestion on your left.
Keep the adventure going, Navigate 
to our playlist! Curious for more?  
Explore the following episode! Don't stop 
now! Watch the next video in the series.
