During the 13th Century BC, ancient Egypt was
recovering from the turbulent Amarna period
that had greatly weakened the empire.
The most notable pharaoh during this period,
Ramesses the Second, restored Egypt to its
former glory and re-established
its dominance over the region.
He maintained stability within
the empire, preserved its borders,
and built immense monuments throughout Egypt.
His unprecedented 66-year-long reign
and countless achievements immortalized him
throughout the world as “Ramesses the Great”.
The 18th dynasty’s rule of Egypt came to an end
in 1292 BC with the death of Pharaoh Horemheb,
as he left behind no heir to the throne.
Before his death, Horemheb appointed his
Chief Vizier, Paramesse, to succeed him as
pharaoh of Egypt, both to reward Paramesse's
undying loyalty and because he had
a son and a grandson, which ensured
a stable line of succession for the empire.
On becoming Pharaoh, Paramesse changed his name
to Ramesses the First, which translates
to “Established by the strength of Ra”.
He ruled Egypt for less than
two years before dying and was
succeeded by his son, Seti the First.
Seti had a successful reign and was able
to reclaim much of the northern lands that had
been lost under the heretic pharaoh, Akhenaten.
He appointed his 14-year-old son, Ramesses, as
prince regent of the empire and provided him
with a grand household and a personal harem.
Seti also made the boy-prince a captain in the
army and brought him along on military campaigns.
It was around this time that Ramesses, then a
teenager, married his principal wife, Nefertari,
who he was extremely fond of and affectionately
referred to as “The one for whom the sun shines”.
In 1279 BC, after an 11-year reign,
Seti died and was succeeded by his son,
who was proclaimed Ramesses the Second.
By this time, Ramesses was about 24 years
old and had extensive military experience.
His first great achievement came
in his second year on the throne,
when he defeated a band of sea pirates called
the ‘Sherden’, who have been theorized as having
originated from Anatolia, Ionia or Sardinia.
These pirates had been plundering Egyptian
vessels along the Mediterranean coast and
wreaking havoc on the local population.
Ramesses cleverly set a trap for the
Sherden by placing several cargo-laden
vessels in an area off the coast.
The sea pirates took the bait,
which resulted in them being surrounded
by a fleet of Egyptian warships.
Ramesses managed to overwhelm and capture
the Sherden pirates in one single action.
The surviving sea pirates were
taken to Egypt as prisoners
and forced to serve as personal bodyguards to
the pharaoh for the remainder of their lives.
Ramesses’ most famous engagement occurred during
the fifth year of his reign, when he fought
against the king of the Hittites, Muwatalli the
Second, for control of the Syrian city of Kadesh.
The pharaoh desired a victory at Kadesh
to expand his empire’s borders into Syria,
as well as to recreate his father’s triumphant
arrival into the city a decade earlier.
The Battle of Kadesh became the largest
chariot battle ever fought in history,
involving an estimated 6,000 chariots.
Ramesses was unsuccessful in capturing the city,
but he declared victory upon
returning to Egypt anyway.
The pharaoh went as far as to claim that he had
single-handedly saved the day and inscribed the
story on temple walls all throughout Egypt.
“Here I stand, all alone; there is no one at
my side. My warriors and chariots have
deserted me. None heard my voice when I,
their king, called for aid. But I find that
Amun's grace is far better to me than a million
fighting men and ten thousand chariots!”
“I was ready to fight like an eager bull.
Equipped with my weapons of victory. I charged
their ranks fighting like a pouncing falcon.
I was like Ra when he rises at dawn. My rays
burned the bodies of the rebels. I slew them
without sparing any. They sprawled before my
horses, and lay slain in heaps of blood!”
Although the pharaoh’s interpretation
of those events bordered on fantasy,
a considerable achievement
did eventually result from
the Battle of Kadesh in the form of
the “Egyptian–Hittite peace-treaty”.
In fact, it is the earliest
known peace-treaty in history,
as well as the only ancient treaty in which
written texts from both sides have survived.
The Egyptian–Hittite treaty was successful
at maintaining peace between the two great
powers for the next century, until the
collapse of the Hittite Empire in 1178 BC.
Ramesses went on to successfully suppress
a Nubian rebellion shortly afterwards
and ordered the events immortalized
on a temple-wall in Nubia, where he
is depicted courageously charging into combat on
a war-chariot, alone against a swarm of rebels.
The number of temple buildings that a pharaoh
could afford was perhaps the best indicator of
the empire’s prosperity at the time, and by
that criteria, Ramesses the Second’s reign
is by far the most notable in Egyptian history.
That, along with his early military prowess,
inspired 19th century Egyptologists
to dub him, "Ramesses the Great”.
Ramesses was determined to immortalize
himself in stone, even if it meant
usurping the statues of his predecessors
by inscribing his own cartouche onto them.
Worried that future pharaohs would do the same
to his works, he ordered that his inscriptions
be carved much deeper into stone than
traditionally done, which not only made
them less susceptible to future change, but
also made them more resistant to erosion.
Another method Ramesses used to ensure that
his legacy would outlast the ravages of time
was to build on a grander scale
than any ruler had before him.
The pharaoh had six temples constructed in
Nubia, the most well-known of which are the
two carved into a cliffside at Abu Simbel.
The first temple is called “The Great Temple”
and is devoted to Ramesses the Second himself.
Its construction took about 20 years and was
completed during the pharaoh’s
24th year on the throne.
It is considered to be the most
impressive and beautiful of all
the temples that he built during his reign.
Four colossal statues representing the pharaoh
sit in front of the temple, each wearing
the double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt.
An earthquake in 27 BC sheared the head
and torso off one of the middle statues,
which remain fragmented in
front of its feet to this day.
The second temple at Abu Simbel
is called “The Small Temple”,
and is dedicated both to his great royal wife,
Queen Nefertari and the goddess of love, Hathor.
The temple’s entrance lies between
four enormous statues of the pharaoh
and two of Nefertari dressed as Hathor.
This is one of the rare instances in ancient
Egyptian history in which the statue of a
pharaoh and his queen are of equal size.
Ramesses built another colossal statue
of himself that was made of red granite
at The Temple of Ptah, near Memphis, but it
was later discovered broken into six pieces.
It was successfully restored using iron bars
to stabilize it from the inside and is now
located near the Grand Egyptian Museum in Giza.
The pharaoh also built a large mortuary complex
called the Ramesseum, which was devoted to
the preservation of his memory as a living god.
The complex was constructed in Upper
Egypt but has been heavily damaged by
floods over the past three millennia due
to its close proximity to the Nile River.
Ramesses went on to build a new capital in
the far north of the empire and called it
Pi-Ramesses, which means “House of Ramesses”.
Pi-Ramesses was located near the Pelusiac branch
of the Nile River and it quickly grew to become
one of the largest cities in ancient Egypt,
inhabited by over 300,000 people.
It continued to flourish for another century
after Ramesses’ reign, until its abandonment in
1060 BC due to the Pelusiac branch silting up,
which left the city without a water source.
Ramesses honored his wife Nefertati after
her death with a large, lavishly decorated
tomb located in the Valley of the Queens.
The wall-paintings within Nefertari’s tomb are
considered to be among some of the greatest works
of art in all of ancient Egyptian history.
At the age of 54, Ramesses joined an
exclusive group of pharaohs who
had ruled Egypt for 30 years.
This occasion was celebrated with
a ritual known as the Sed festival,
which was then repeated every two to three years.
The festival’s purpose was to rejuvenate a
pharaoh's vigor and strength while
they still held the throne, as well
as to commemorate their accomplishments.
Ramesses celebrated an unprecedented 14 Sed 
festivals throughout his life, which eclipsed
any amount ever celebrated by other pharaohs.
Ramesses had over 200 wives and over
100 children, most of whom he outlived.
Towards the end of his life, Ramesses
suffered from artery hardening,
dental decay, and arthritis.
After a reign of 66 years,
he died in 1213 BC at the age of 90 and
was buried in the Valley of the Kings.
He was succeeded by his then 70-year-old son,
Merneptah, who was in line for the throne because
he had outlived all 12 of his older brothers.
Ramesses’ mummy was discovered in 1881 and
is currently on display at the National
Museum of Egyptian Civilization in Cairo.
Through countless architectural
endeavors and unprecedented longevity,
Ramesses the Great cemented his legacy
as ancient Egypt’s greatest pharaoh!
Consider liking, commenting,
subscribing and clicking the
bell icon below for more videos like this.
Also, please consider using the links below
to visit the History Explained merchandise
shop and Patreon page to help in the creation
of new videos.
Thank you!
