Winter celebrations are popular across the 
world with Christmas dominating much of the  
western tradition. It's a winning recipe of the 
things we love: friends, family, gift giving,  
singing, feasting, partying, and more. The 
Romans too celebrated Christmas as far back  
as the 4th century AD. However before 
that they had their own winter holiday  
which honestly blows the 
stockings off our own tradition.  
It was a weeklong mardi-gras style street 
festival fueled by endless drinking where  
slaves became masters and fools were crowned king. 
You had all your classic holiday style carolling  
and gift giving though far far naughtier with 
a healthy does of ancient blackjack and hookers  
sprinkled on top. This was the festival of 
Saturnalia, Rome’s awesome pagan Christmas.
i spend a lot of time reading history books 
to make these documentaries yet i still find  
myself with a growing list of titles i just 
don't have time to get to i'm sure in your  
own busy life it can be tough to find the 
time to explore as many books as you'd like  
thankfully our sponsor blinkist has a 
solution blinkist is an app that takes  
thousands of non-fiction books and uses experts 
to distill them down to the most essential ideas  
for you to easily digest with text or audio in 
just 15 minutes this can be super helpful for  
engaging with subjects you'd never otherwise get 
to or for making a short list of the books you  
definitely want to read in full as an example 
i've finally been able to delve into steven  
levitz's freakonomics evil harares sapiens 
and stephen hawkings a brief history of time  
it's honestly been extremely liberating and a 
huge breath of fresh air for my ever curious mind  
you can check it out right now by clicking 
the link in the description below to get a  
7 day free trial in addition the first 100 people 
will get 25 off a full membership so check it out
Like many people in the ancient world, the Roman 
year was filled with festivals. These celebrated  
all kinds of important events but were aimed 
mostly at making sure the gods were kept happy.  
After all, there was nothing more important for 
the well being of the individual and the state.
Such holidays were known as dies ferialis. There 
were many of these every month, each with their  
own specific traditions. Generally speaking, the 
more important festivals coincided with major  
events, like the change of seasons or the new 
year, with the relevant god or gods taking center  
stage. A short list of some of those festivals 
includes the Lupercalia in February, the Liberalia  
in March, the Bona Dea and the Lemuria in May, the 
Ludi Apollinaris in July, the Herculi Invictus in  
August, and the Saturnalia in December. While all 
of these certainly merit their own episode, today  
we will be focusing on Rome’s end of year festival 
that would later transform into our Christmas.
As with most other Roman religious customs, 
Saturnalia traces its origins back to the Greeks.  
It is this hellenic civilization which 
influenced Roman mythology early in its  
development and would continue 
to do so over the centuries. The  
Roman god Saturn for example is roughly 
synonymous with the Greek god Cronus,  
both of whom are associated with rebirth, 
harvest, and heralding a new golden age.
In Rome, the holiday of Saturnalia started out 
humbly as an agricultural festival set around  
the winter solstice in December when the people 
would collect their last harvest of the year.  
As they concluded this work they would mark the 
occasion by honoring Saturn. This would be done  
at the temple of the harvest god at the foot of 
the Capitoline Hill. Here Rome’s priests would  
gather at the head of the population with the 
upper classes wearing their best togas and the  
plebeians wearing their finest tunics. A parade 
of bulls, the largest of the year, would then be  
brought in and sacrificed. The event was carried 
out under the watchful eye of Saturn himself.  
The way this worked is the priests would actually 
bring with them a statue of the god bound in wool.  
As the ceremonies began, they would 
ritualistically unwrap the statue  
and place it on a couch. Symbolically this 
represented the idea of rebirth where Saturn  
would appear like a newborn child “springing 
from the womb in the tenth month”. Once upon  
his couch, the god would then be able 
to partake in the feast which followed.  
For the remainder of the day, all forms of 
work and public business would be suspended.
Over time as Rome grew the holiday would continue 
to evolve. The official ceremony we have just  
described apparently underwent a series of reforms 
around the 3rd century BC when Greek practices  
were imported upon consultation with the Sibylline 
Books. Additionally, the festival would now be  
pinned to December 17, rather than arbitrarily 
following the final harvest. Because of the  
holiday's popularity, it was also incrementally 
expanded over time, from one feast day  
up to a total of seven. Let’s now take a closer 
look at the full glory of this Pagan Christmas.
The days leading up to Saturnalia would have 
Rome abuzz. As a major public holiday, it was  
the duty of the aediles to oversee the official 
preparations. With their reputation on the line,  
they would have been hard at work planning on how 
to make each year's celebration as memorable as  
possible. Part of this involved employing 
hundreds of laborers to transform Rome for  
the occasion by cleaning the streets, setting up 
decorations, and erecting temporary structures.  
This would be necessary to accommodate 
the huge swell in the city’s population  
caused by celebrants flocking in from the 
countryside. Afterall Rome was still a highly  
rural society with many small towns and farms 
dominating the land. Saturnalia as a harvest  
festival was a particularly strong magnet for 
farmers who were keen to give thanks to Saturn  
as well as to be able to reunite with old 
friends and acquaintances in the big city.  
Thus Rome’s homes, inns, and taverns filled 
with growing excitement as families looked  
forward to the festivities. With the days 
slowly ticking away, people were sure to  
be rushing to make final preparations and 
close out business before the holidays.
Finally the day would come. It was December 
17th. Starting in the early hours of the morning,  
people across Rome would awake and begin to stream 
into the Forum, eager to secure the best spots and  
celebrate the time honored tribute to Saturn. 
Once settled, they waited with baited breath.  
Soon their patience would be rewarded by a low 
rumble that would begin to grow and grow until,  
in the distance, its source was revealed. A grand 
parade was making its way through the streets of  
Rome. At its head were the priests and senate and 
behind them a seemingly endless line of bulls.  
This procession made its way past the throngs of 
onlookers until eventually coming to a stop before  
the Temple of Saturn. Here the animals would then 
be sacrificed and a great feast prepared with a  
reclining statue of Saturn as its honorary 
guest. Surely the god would be most pleased  
by this dazzling display of piety. Rome’s good 
fortune for the following year had been secured.
Thus ended the official component of Saturnalia. 
All public business was stopped on this day,  
and would remain closed for the duration of 
the festival. No law courts were conducted,  
all schools were closed, and even the 
mechanisms to declare war were shut down.  
This was a time for celebration, and the 
Romans were particularly good at that.
The following free flowing festivities were 
guided only by customs. But while un-regulated,  
they did share the common theme of a world turned 
upside down where traditional roles and social  
norms were inverted. It seems that this may have 
gotten its origin as a nod to the idea of a return  
to Saturn’s Golden Age which had existed before 
rank and order, before slavery and property.  
Now was a time to make this 
edenic existence a reality.
The first sign of change were the holiday 
clothes. During the festival people traded  
their bland togas for brightly colored garments 
and everyone from Emperor to slave wore the felt  
pileus cap which traditionally signified one’s 
status as a free man. The second sign of change  
was the new social order. Each family would 
select a “princeps” or leader of Saturnalia  
who was typically of lower status. This might be 
a child or servant. Slaves were treated as equals  
and might even be elevated to the point that their 
former masters served them. Reportedly slaves  
were exempt from punishment and even allowed to 
insult their masters - within bounds of reason.
This all came together at the grand public 
feast on the first day of Saturnalia following  
the religious ceremony at the temple of Saturn. 
The aediles for the year would actually foot the  
bill and plan out the banquet which meant that 
its appearance depended on who was responsible  
and how much money they had. Most of the 
time, tables would be set up in the forum,  
the only open space large enough 
to hold such a large population.  
The aediles would coordinate with the hundreds 
of local bakeries and other food providers who  
worked overtime to build up a massive stockpile 
for the occasion. The meals were as extravagant  
as possible and became truly incredible 
with the rise of the cosmopolitan Empire.
Arriving at the feast, one would witness a truly 
impressive display. From the bakers came the best  
breads, tarts, spiced cakes, pastries, and "little 
Gaiuses," while from the merchants and farmers  
came produce of every description: plums, pears, 
apples, nuts, dates, and more. They would be  
incorporated into dishes, made into candied fruit, 
and eaten whole. In addition, meats and wines from  
every corner of the empire were set out to give 
the illusion of a truly unlimited river of drink.  
Even rare delicacies were served to all, 
things that the upper classes ate and the  
poorer couldn't afford, like stuffed dormice, 
sow wombs, as well as varieties of exotic fish  
and birds - including lampreys and flamingos 
and peacocks. This fantastical banquet of  
dreams was gorged upon by all of Rome. For hours, 
everyone ate and drank to their heart’s content.  
When the meal was finally winding down, the 
shouts of “Io Saturnalia!” would break out.  
They heralded that the greatest party 
of the year had only just begun.
For seven days, people partied in a carnival 
like atmosphere akin to a New Orleans Mardi Gras.  
Everyone was encouraged to join in the fun, and 
sleep was in short supply. However there were  
of course your typical Christmas grinches. 
The philosopher Seneca apparently tried to  
convince a friend to replace the wild revelry with 
a quiet dinner and Pliny the Younger actually had  
a soundproof suite built so that he could get 
work done while his entire household partied.  
But peace and quiet was hard to come by. 
Here is a revealing quote from Libanius: 
“Night falls but no one sleeps. 
The common people engage in songs,  
wild dancing, and mocking jests. They 
do this even in the commercial district,  
barging in, pounding on doors, shouting and 
mocking. Some people are angry with what they  
hear, but others consider it an occasion for 
laughter. No one present is so austere that  
he censures these goings-on; even he who is too 
self-controlled to laugh breaks out laughing.”
Meanwhile the public spaces teemed with 
activity. The forum for instance drew  
huge crowds to see a range of itinerant performers 
from jugglers, to puppeteers, and snake charmers.  
Otherwise illegal gambling tables were 
set up as well and drew many participants.  
Sponsors might also pay for lavish displays 
of entertainment. In one instance we hear of  
female gladiatrices, dwarfs, buxom Lydian girls, 
and performers who came in from Syria to Spain.  
Emperors too got in on the fun 
and were not to be outdone.  
Nero was infamous for stealing the show by 
providing a truly impressive number of free  
prostitutes for the week. This was definitely a 
naughty Christmas that would seem at odds with  
our own holiday. However there were other 
traditions which will seem more familiar.
One of these was the practice of gift 
giving which took place throughout the week.  
The poet Martial writes about individual, 
personalized gifts with small greeting  
cards to go with them and even alludes to a secret 
Santa style form of gift giving that was popular.  
These ancient Roman presents could be anything: 
musical instruments, writing tablets, boxes of  
hobby supplies, beauty products, toothpicks, 
tableware, exercise equipment, weapons,  
or even a well-bred pig. Children generally got 
dolls while close friends were given special wax  
candles that were lit to signal the advent 
of a “golden age” coming in the new year.  
Augustus himself loved the holiday, and 
gave lavish and gag gifts in equal measure:  
“On the Saturnalia, and at any other 
time when he took it into his head,  
he would sometimes give gifts of clothing or 
gold and silver, sometimes all kinds of coins,  
including old pieces of the kings and foreign 
money, sometimes nothing but hair cloth, sponges,  
pokers and tongs, and other such things 
under misleading names of double meaning.”  
Sometimes the sheer volume of presents required 
for the holidays lowered their average quality.  
As Martial writes “Let everyone give his guest 
an appropriate gift. ‘But they’re all worthless  
garbage!’ you might say. Well no one says they’re 
not - no one would deny anything so obvious.“
Another tradition with modern echoes was 
the practice of the “Kings of Saturnalia”  
who were crowned by lot. During 
their reign they had to be obeyed  
with the sole requirement that their 
edicts be dumb commands. For example,  
telling everyone in the street to stop what 
they were doing and dance, to give the flute  
girls piggy back rides around the block, or to 
dunk an innocent bystander in a nearby fountain.  
However things could go too far if the liberties 
of the holiday crossed the line into reality.  
For example we are told that when Julius Caesar 
was celebrating Saturnalia after having won his  
civil war, his lieutenant, Mark Antony, made 
a big show of offering the crown of Saturnalia  
to Caesar. This was met by the fury of a booing 
crowd. The role was supposed to be a joke, making  
a mockery of the powerful. To give the joke crown 
to an actual dictator of Rome was not fun and  
struck a little too close to home. Clearly there 
were still some lines that should not be crossed.
At long last, the festival 
of Saturnalia came to an end.  
The “Kings” were symbolically dethroned to mark 
the occasion and everyone had their last hurrah  
with shouts of “Io Saturnalia”! Perhaps their 
throbbing heads would look forward to the days of  
calm which followed but it wouldn’t be long before 
they began to dream of next year’s festivities.
As one might imagine, the tremendous popularity of 
Saturnalia ensured that it lived on for centuries.  
This trend was further propelled because unlike 
many other Roman festivals, the Saturnalia was  
not tied to the city of Rome, and therefore 
gained traction across the entire Empire.  
After all, winter celebrations are a 
universal tradition which transcend borders,  
especially when they involve the winning 
combination of feasting, drinking, and partying.
Such was the popularity of Saturnalia 
that when Christianity rose to dominance  
in the 4th century AD the pagan holiday 
would be co-opted rather than cancelled.  
It appears this is one of the reasons 
Christmas was set just a few days after  
Saturnalia - December 25 instead of the 17th 
- and maintained many of the same customs.  
This hybridized holiday was a far 
rowdier event in these early days,  
and while the mass street partying has 
generally been toned down over the ages,  
many things are still held as tradition. For 
years, the Feast of Fools was an incredibly  
popular festival until it was banned by the 
Church in the 15th and 16th centuries. Wax  
candles are still a central part of a traditional 
Christmas with Advent candles and Freedman’s caps  
have generally been replaced by Santa hats, or if 
you live in Britain, paper caps and crowns. And,  
of course, the tradition of giving gifts to 
family and friends is still running strong.
Thanks for watching this episode! What do you 
think of the pagan origins of Christmas? Would  
you prefer a more Saturnalian festival, or are 
you more fond of the family-friendly version?  
Feel free to leave any questions in the comments 
below, and make sure to like and subscribe for  
more content. A very special thanks to the patrons 
for funding the channel and to the researchers,  
writers, and artists who made this 
episode possible. “Io Saturnalia!”
