At around 12:05pm on the 11th of July, 
1978, a fully-loaded tanker truck  
left a state-owned refinery in a small town 
in the autonomous Catalonian region of Spain.
It set off on a routine trip to Puertollano, 
an industrial city approximately six hours away  
by road. The truck never reached its 
destination. Before it was even halfway  
there it would become the cause of an accident 
which would claim more than 200 innocent lives.
The truck was owned and 
operated by Cisternas Reunidas,  
a company which specialized in the transport 
of hazardous chemicals and other merchandise.
The chemical being transported on the day of the 
disaster was indeed a hazardous one: liquefied  
propylene. Propylene of this type is used in 
the manufacture of a huge range of products,  
everything from photographic 
film to food containers.  
In its raw form, however, it is an 
intensely volatile flammable material.
Propylene is normally a gas, but is stored under 
pressure as a liquid for processing and transport.  
Reports concerning how the incident began 
vary hugely. The truck, fully loaded with  
liquid propylene, was passing through the 
region of Alcanar on a relatively small road  
when something went wrong. Some witnesses state 
that the truck swerved and crashed while others  
report it sprang a leak, prompting the driver to 
stop and try to fix the problem. Whether the truck  
stopped or crashed is unknown, but what is certain 
is that the main body of the container ruptured.  
Propylene began to leak from the stationary 
tanker, instantly becoming a gas. This gas formed  
a dense white cloud which, assisted by the breeze, 
drifted over the nearby Los Alfaques campsite.
The site was packed with around 
1,000 holidaymakers at the time.  
The cloud had expanded to cover such a distance 
that few people present on the campsite could  
see the stranded truck or judge the source 
of the strange cloud. Unaware of its origin,  
some even approached it out of curiosity, perhaps 
considering it a freak weather phenomenon.  
While the cloud enveloped the campsite tendrils 
of gaseous propylene had also drifted up the road  
all the way to a nearby discotheque. There the gas 
encountered a spark, or other source of ignition.  
Flames erupted, flashing back through the cloud 
all the way to the tanker which exploded with  
colossal force. The cloud of gas enveloping the 
campsite became, in mere moments, a fireball.  
Everything within 90 meters (or 300 feet) 
of the truck was destroyed by the blast.  
Cars were melted, buildings leveled, and people 
killed outright. Everything within 300 meters  
(or 980 feet) was ravaged by fire. This 
included almost the entire campsite.  
Victims were seen with their hair and clothes 
ablaze, fleeing into the sea in an attempt to  
put out the flames. Some witnesses report that the 
sea itself boiled in the heat from the explosion.
The heat and flames also caused 
several secondary explosions.  
34 vehicles were gutted, in total, with 
some exploding and causing further injury.  
Cylinders of cooking gas used by 
campers became deadly explosives.
In the immediate aftermath a rescue effort began.  
Locals loaded the injured into cars and vans and 
drove them at full speed to nearby hospitals.
Firefighters and ambulance personnel arrived 
and began the impossible task of triaging  
hundreds of severely injured people.
In total 140 people with severe burns were 
transported to one of two local hospitals  
over the course of three long hours.
On the 11th of July 1978 the disaster 
claimed the lives of 217 people,  
although many more died of their injuries 
in the weeks and months which followed.  
The final toll was around 
270 dead and 300 injured.
The task of identifying all of 
the victims was a gargantuan one,  
complicated still further by the fact that 
many of the dead were wearing only swimsuits,  
with no forms of identification 
to be found about their person.
The building within the campsite where records 
were kept had also been completely destroyed.  
While all of the victims of the disaster 
were eventually identified, in many cases  
by dental records, it sometimes took years before 
remains were returned to their country of origin.  
An investigation revealed multiple failures in 
safety protocol which contributed to the disaster.  
The tanker, it was noted, had been overfilled 
- something that was routine practice at the  
Enpetrol refinery. The facility had no measuring 
device to determine how full a tanker was,  
nor an automatic shutoff to prevent 
overfilling. In the months before  
the disaster many tankers leaving the 
facility had been dangerously overloaded.
Additionally the tanker had no emergency pressure 
relief valves. Previously this would have  
precluded it from carrying flammable materials, 
but regulations had recently been loosened in  
this regard and pressure release valves were no 
longer mandatory at the time of the disaster.  
The lack of pressure release valves was 
compounded by weaknesses in the hull of the tank.  
Close examination revealed that it had previously 
been used to transport corrosive substances  
which had greatly weakened the structural 
integrity of the walls of the tank.  
While an undamaged container with pressure release 
valves might still have exploded eventually,  
it would likely have remained intact long enough 
for the immediate area around it to be evacuated.
Cisternas Reunidas accepted responsibility 
for the disaster and shouldered the blame  
for all these oversights, but there was 
one point where there was some dispute.  
Drivers reported that they had routinely 
been instructed to avoid using the motorway  
in favor of smaller roads that passed through 
densely populated areas. The reason? To avoid  
the company having to reimburse them for a 
motorway toll. Cisternas Reunidas insisted  
that the route taken was entirely down to the 
drivers and no official conclusion was reached.
Ultimately four employees of Cisternas Reunidas 
were given jail sentences for gross negligence.  
These were relatively short terms and 
in all cases were quashed within a year.  
Compensation amounting to around 13 million 
Euros (15.8 million Dollars) was paid to  
the victims - enough to settle all 
civil suits against the company.  
Over the months and years that followed the 
tragedy many changes were made to regulations  
surrounding the transport of dangerous goods 
- most notably it was forbidden for dangerous  
goods to be transported through populated 
areas when an alternate route was available.
The Los Alfaques campsite was rebuilt.  
The owner notes that she is still traumatized 
by the events of the 11th of July 1978,  
but that there is no better comfort to her 
than welcoming holidaymakers to the campsite -  
including several families who survived the 
disaster and have chosen to return year on year.  
While the site is forever haunted by the specter 
of the explosion, the landscape will recover,  
and better memories than those of that dark 
day will be made there for many years to come.
