Lo agarramos llendo a la Frontera
Did you get it?
No.
This is all he had on him.
Fellas.
Nathan Drake!
In the flesh.
Legendary treasure hunter,
Explorer!
Historian!
Thief.
Whoa, hey- I think you have me confused with somebody else, pal.
The man responsible for finding El Dorado,
Corvera,
And Shambala.
Oh. Then yes. Okay, then. Yeah, that's me.
Last night an antiquities collector held a private auction in La Paz.
A rare item of great value was stolen.
An item my employer rightfully purchased.
So imagine my surprise
When I find out that Nathan Drake is in town.
Sounds like quite a coincidence.
I'd say.
Tell me
What exactly is this?
That is a compass.
Perhaps we can...
use it to find this fella a 
haircut that didn't go out in the '90s.
Am I right guys?
You're a funny guy
-Where is it?
-Look? I don't know what it is you're looking for, but I don't have it
My employer is not a man you want to cross.
-You've already made 'em quite angry. 
-I do tend to have that effect on people.
Let's try this once more, shall we?
Before I violently remove 
something you care deeply about.
So does that mean..
if I care deeply about you, you'll leave?
Okay, okay, we'll see how cooperative you are after a little time with "El Tigre"
"El" who?
-You're getting all this?
-Oh yeah! Loud and clear, Kid!
Pulling up plans for the house now. Let's keep those guys busy a little longer
Easy for you to say, you're not about to get your finger removed from some fella named "El Tigre".
I'm not sure that's the body part they're thinkin' of removing.
Oh oh!
That's "El Tigre"?
Thank God! Guys, Oh
Whoo! Seriously, that's... You guys. You got me, you got me... That was..
Well presented... I was scared.
Have fun.
Hey there little guy, what do you want to be when you grow up?
Oh Crap.
Wait! Wait.
I don't want to micromanage this thing, 
but I think you're supposed to be asking questions in between the punch
I consider this a privilege, "Cabron"
I hear there're many men who would pay a great deal to spend some time alone with you.
Awkward.
Got it. Second floor, southeast corner.
Tigre!
Algo no esta bien
-Nate! You good?
-Ah Yeah... Never better
It doesn't look like they're on to you yet. So just get moving
-They seem pretty pissed about the bracelet.
-Yeah, I should've told 'em you have it. 
My face wouldn't be as sore.
-Keeping it nice and warm for me?
-Oh, yeah, nice and toasty
Hey, not to put a damper on things, but what happens if those letters aren't there?
Chloé said that the intel is solid.
Guy paid top dollar for it.
Yeah, they paid top dollar for security, too.
Okay, I'm in
Sully
-You really need to check out this room. 
-Yeah, maybe on the next tour. Hurry up will ya?
These guys gonna be on to you in a minute.
Here we go, I found Sir Albuquerque's letters.
Ooh... This guy's not messing around
He's got original copies dating back to the conquest of Malacca
Here we go.
October 1511, that's right before they sailed back to Portugal in the Florida Lamarr
Which is now sitting at the bottom of the Indian Ocean, I'm telling you Nate. It's Wild Goose
Yeah, wild goose worth 2 billion.
The most valuable lost treasure in human history.
Wait a minute..
He's got a whole stack of letters from Ferdinand Magellan to Albuquerque
Earliest one is dated such a few weeks after the floor sink. So..
So Magellan served under Albuquerque during the conquest, but history tells us that's the last they saw of each other.
Unless..
-Holy shit Sully. Do you know what this means? 
-Kid, whenever you start doing this, nobody knows what you mean.
Looks like it's gonna have to wait.
They found your friends. Get the hell out of there!
Just like old times.
Miss me?
You know, I always find myself amazed that you two are incapable of returning these things the way you found them
-We got the insurance. You did get the insurance right? 
-I thought you did?
Right.
As Promised.
-Wow!
-Right?
-So we're gonna break this open? I feel like we're always breaking things open.
-How about I hang onto that?
Hey! Did you see this?
-Well, I'll be go to hell 
-A triangle?
-Not just a triangle, it's a Trinity.
A Trinity, oh my god, of course.
When the flor Delamar sank, it took 400 people down with it, but not Albuquerque.
He was rescued by another ship called the trendajey
Portuguese for trinity. Exactly. Now, history is spotty on who captained it, but there was another ship called the Trinidad.
A spanish flagship famous for having been the first to sail around the world.
Magellan. Holy shit.
Magellan captained the rescue ship.
Oh..
-Would you look at that.
-Could those be coordinates?
It never made any sense, why would Albuquerque, considered to be one of the most brilliant military minds in history
Put his treasure on the flor Delamar, a ship that had proven itself time and time again to be unseaworthy.
What if the reason no one has found the treasure of the Flor delamar is because the treasure was never on it.
-It was on the trendaje. 
-Exactly it never sank, and Magellan and Albuquerque both knew it.
So, what's this then?
Our next stop.
Well, I understand the weather in the Philippines is particularly fine this time of year.
