Portugal and India share a lot of common history 
ever since Vasco Da Gama’s voyage, but what may  
come as a surprise is that the Portuguese language 
already shared many similarities to the numerous  
languages spoken in India, including inflection, 
word structure, pronunciation, and vocabulary.  
Languages constantly change and adapt, but in the 
case of Portuguese, Hindi, Farsi, Latin, Greek,  
English, Polish, and many others, there is only 
one common ancestor, which binds them all into  
a single family. Welcome to the first video on 
the evolution of the Indo-European languages.
 
Wait, did you know you can watch this 
video in Spanish and in 4 other languages?  
You can simply change the audio 
track in the video settings.  
We generated these audio tracks using Aloud. Aloud 
lets creators translate their videos. At no cost  
and no special skills needed. We have been using 
Aloud for months already and we see that it brings  
value to our viewers. If you think more creators 
should make videos available in other languages,  
check out the link in the pinned comment. Let’s 
overcome the language barrier in videos together.
 
For millions of years, evolution was 
the main pathway of human development,  
as genetic information was passed down from one 
generation to the next. It was that same force,  
which gave humans very unique tools, which we used 
to climb the food chain, such as opposable thumbs,  
sweating, and larger brains. Then suddenly 
the ability to make complex sounds and more  
importantly, the acute sensitivity to comprehend 
speech ushered in the development of languages,  
which allowed us to pass knowledge at a 
speed that dramatically surpassed evolution.  
Languages to this day remain an essential part of 
our everyday life, as they help us communicate,  
express ourselves and define our identity. 
Over the years thousands of languages have gone  
extinct, and yet there are still over 7100 of them 
divided into 142 families. The largest among them,  
spoken by 3.2 billion people or 46% of the world’s 
population is the Indo-European language family. 
 
The story begins with the incredibly influential 
Yamnaya culture at around 4000 BC in the Pontic  
Steppe of modern day Ukraine. Its people were 
semi-nomadic pastoralists who domesticated cattle,  
dogs, and above all horses. This is where the 
oldest discovered wheels were uncovered, as well  
as burial sites that show one of the earliest 
forms of ownership. Compared to the widespread  
communal tombs we find in most societies, the 
Yamnaya burial pits belonged to clans, families,  
or even individuals, sometimes buried with entire 
wagons. Combined with the fact that they were one  
of the first bronze age cultures, this allowed the 
Yamnaya to spread across Eurasia on their horses.  
This expansion was swift and aggressive, and 
rather than developing their own colonies,  
they interbred with the local neolithic 
cultures spreading their genes,  
as well as their Proto Indo-European language. 
In time, the speakers of this language became  
isolated from each other and regional dialects 
developed into their own daughter languages,  
a process that continues to this day. Using the 
comparative method, linguists and archeologists  
were able to reconstruct the original ancestor 
vocabulary, despite the fact that it was never  
written down. In fact, the words for writing, 
sea, and iron are vastly different across the  
many Indo-European languages, since those 
concepts arose after the original migration.  
However, the words that were commonly used 
by the Yamnaya people, were nearly identical  
across Latin, Germanic, Ancient Greek, 
Hittite, Slavonic, Avestan, and Sanskrit. 
 
On your screen, you can see how the cognate 
words for family remained mostly the same across  
Indo-European sister languages, including words 
for family members: Mother -Father-Brother-Sister.  
This is also the case for various verbs 
describing actions that were fundumental  
to the lifestyle of the Yamnaya people, like 
Sew-Cloth-Eat-Drink-Carry-Give-Die. The same  
can be said about various objects, animals, 
and particularly the word wine, among them:  
Tooth-Bone-Eye-Night-God-Water-Fire-Tree-New-Young-Pig-Sheep-Beaver  
-Honey-Brew -Wine . One of the very first things 
we learn in a new language are the pronouns and  
basic numbers and yet again we see that both are 
shared throughout the various different cultures:  
I-You-We- As well as the 
numbers from one to ten. 
 
Languages and pronunciations changed as they 
grew apart and interacted with each other,  
as well as other languages outside the 
Indo-European family, adding and exporting  
loan words, but the writing that these various 
cultures developed hints at their shared origin.  
The comparisons between the Greek god Zeus 
and Roman god Jupiter are often discussed,  
but in reality, both of those gods are adaptations 
of the original Yamnaya god Perkwunos the Striker,  
a concept also shared in Hittite culture as 
Tarhuna, in the Thracian tribes as Zibelthiurdos,  
while Dacian tribes knew him as Gebeleizis, 
Albanian culture groups knew him as Perendi.  
Baltic mythology has Perkunas, Slavic people 
knew him as Perun, Celtic tribes as Taranis,  
while the Norse people split the singular concept 
into Thor and Odin, Anglo-Saxon mythology knew  
him as Thunor, and Hindu people initially believed 
that Indra was the king of the heaven and thunder.  
Additionally, the very concept of an 
overarching conflict between Rain and the Sun,  
Water and Fire, Man versus Beast most likely 
arose from the Proto-Indo European legends.
 
While it is easier to imagine the various 
subgroups of the Proto Indo-European  
as separate branches, it is more accurate to 
view them as waves, that constantly moved and  
interacted with each other and others. That being 
said, the first major branch we will look at is  
Italic, a language that spread alongside Celtic, 
until the Alps split the two around 1500 BC.  
By 300 BC the language was fighting for 
survival against its Celtic, Illyrian and  
Greek neighbors who dominated the north and 
even eliminated the Sicel branch in Sicily,  
with only Faliscian, Umbrian, Oscan, and Venetic 
remaining. And then suddenly the Roman Republic  
rose from obscurity and spread the Latin language 
across the Mediterranean and western Europe like  
wildfire, obliterating all other Italic and 
most of the Celtic languages in the process. 
 
The Latin language itself had two variants, 
classical Latin, which was the formal language  
and Vulgar Latin, which Cicero describes as 
“the speech of the masses”. A standardized  
and universal language in the Empire, one that 
brought status and economic opportunity was one  
of the tools that allowed the Romans to establish 
themselves as a military and cultural powerhouse.  
However due to the size of the Empire, many 
regions began developing a distinct dialect,  
unique to the province and when Rome fell, 
those dialects evolved into their own languages,  
ushering in the dawn of the Romance languages. The 
subdivisions of Romance include the now-extinct  
British, Pannonian, and African Romance languages, 
Sardinian which is an incredibly conservative  
language, Romanian , and finally one of the most 
dominant subdivisions: Western Romance, featuring  
Italian, French, Spanish, and Portuguese. 
To simplify what could be its own video,  
each of these languages underwent significant 
changes throughout the middle ages, as various  
feudal states and dynasties struggled 
for power internally and externally.  
This resulted in dozens of dialects within each 
language , but if we draw a line between any two  
points between these countries, the further 
you go, the harder it is to understand the  
local language. But as the middle ages came 
to a close and states became more centralized,  
rulers selected the dialect of their hometown and 
emphasized its use, a process mirrored in every  
other branch. The Castillian kings choose 
Castillian as the foundation for Spanish,  
discouraging the use of Galician, Leonese, Basque 
, and Catalan, and eliminating Mozarabic, and this  
process was finalized by the so-called Catholic 
monarchs - Ferdinand and Isabella, who understood  
the efficiency of using just one language to rule 
their realm. The French kings ruling from Paris  
chose the langue d'oïl, spoken in the north, 
rather than Occitan or Franco-Provencal,  
as king Francis I formalized this in 1539 with 
the Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts , which was  
also aimed against the power of the 
Occitan nobles and Catholic church. 
 
The unification of Italy occurred 
much later, but a similar process  
ensued after the Tuscan dialect was 
chosen as the foundation of Italian.  
Modern day Italy could give us a glimpse 
of what other countries looked like  
as there are numerous local dialects with 
varying degrees of differences between them.  
For example, an Italian from Florence is more 
likely to understand a person speaking in Spanish  
rather than another Italian from Sicily . 
Nationalism, education and literature are always  
major drivers of standardization and helped shape 
languages within a certain state, but given enough  
time and isolation, speech can alter dramatically, 
even if the writing system remains the same.  
That is exactly what we see in the colonies of 
the Romance languages: Mexico, Quebec, and Brazil  
all share the languages of their founders, but 
they also developed their own unique features.
 
The next major branch we will review is 
Proto-Greek , which arrived in northern  
Greece around the 3rd millennium BC. The first 
stage of its evolution saw the rise of Mycenaean  
Greek as the dominant language of the region, with 
its very own writing, which we now call Linear B.  
But neither would survive the fall of the 
Mycenaean civilization in the 12th century BC,  
instead around the same time the Greek alphabet 
was created, based on the Phoenician alphabet,  
with a few added letters. It was this same 
alphabet, which would deeply influence the Latin,  
Cyrillic, Coptic and Gothic alphabets. Armed 
with one of the first written systems, Greek  
colonists settled the coasts of France, Italy, 
Anatolia, and the entire Black Sea, but despite  
using the alphabet, rival dialects competed for 
dominance. As you may have guessed this rivalry  
was mostly between the Greek city-states of Athens 
and Sparta. Despite the popularity of the Spartan  
Doric Greek in the mainland, Crete, and Sicily 
and military victory over Athens, the Ionic Greek  
won the cultural war, thanks to the works of 
Homer, Plato, Socrates, Aristotle, and others.  
And thus Classical Greek became the staple of 
Greek culture and would contribute to numerous  
loan words, present in many other languages 
today. The next crucial figure in this story  
is Alexander the Great himself, who spread the 
common version of the language called Koine with  
his conquests and firmly established it in Greece, 
as well as inner Anatolia, Egypt, and India.  
This was the language in which the New Testament 
was written. Despite centuries under Roman rule,  
the prestige of the language with its deeply 
embedded written form, allowed it to avoid  
the Celtic fate, and when the West collapsed 
Koine Greek transformed into Medieval Greek,  
spoken in the Eastern Roman Empire. By this point, 
there was a huge disparity between the Classic  
and spoken versions of the language, with the 
former being used primarily in court and writing.  
The fall of Constantinople, triggered many 
events, one of which was the transformation of  
both of these languages. The spoken Medieval Greek 
turned into Demotic Greek meaning by the people  
and the written language called Katharevousa, 
which added some elements of the spoken language,  
but mostly resembles Classical Greek. The 
substantial differences in both languages  
made daily transactions incredibly confusing and 
this problem persisted for centuries, until it  
was finally solved in 1976, when Demotic Greek 
was made the official language still used today.  
As for Doric Greek, it is spoken by only a few 
hundred elderly people in Southern Greece and is  
expected to become extinct in the coming years. 
It took a significant amount of time for  
Proto-Germanic to expand beyond a small area 
in North Europe, during which it already split  
into three distinct dialect s: East, West and 
North . We know very little about the early  
stage of this branch, as it used a runic 
writing system, usually carved on trees.  
But as the Roman Empire fell, the most famous 
language from the eastern dialect spread all  
over Europe. Gothic was incredibly influential and 
left a lasting mark on the continent, despite the  
fact that it would eventually become extinct. 
The North dialect, which we now call Old Norse  
was also very popular due to the Viking era. It 
would create west and east variants of its own  
from which modern Icelandic, Norwegian, 
and then Danish and Swedish descended.  
It is important to note that Icelandic stands out 
as a very conservative language, which has more  
in common with Old Norse than any of them, once 
again outlining the important role of geography.
 
During the first millenium BC, Celtic was the 
lingua franca of Western and Central Europe,  
largely due to the dominant Urnfield culture. 
As the branch spread it split into various other  
forms like Lepontic, Celtiberian, Gaulish, 
Galatian and others. However the rise of the  
Roman Republic would lead to the extinction of all 
continental Celtic languages. The few surviving  
speakers migrated to the British isles, forming 
what is known as the Insular Celtic languages,  
further divided in Goedelic languages, featuring 
Irish, Scottish and Manx Gaelic and Brythonic  
languages, featuring Breton , Cornish and Welsh. 
Despite being so closely connected to each other,  
the two groups are not intelligible. Each 
of these languages struggled to endure the  
centuries of deliberate censorship and 
oppression from various states. In total  
there are just under 1 million speakers of the 
Celtic languages, with half of them being Welsh.  
In the 19th century Cornish came very close 
to joining Pictish and Cumbric in extinction,  
but has since undergone a revival and now boasts 
a few hundred speakers. The Celtic language group  
stands as a clear example of how politics can 
affect culture in incredibly impactful ways.  
 
Lastly, we have West Germanic, which spread 
towards areas disconnected from each other by  
forests, mountains, wide rivers, and the English 
channel. Naturally, this split the language into  
four notable branches: Old High German, Old Low 
German, Old Low Franconian, and Anglo-Frisian,  
which will inevitably form German, Dutch and 
English. The evolution, development and spread  
of each of these languages are very interesting, 
but extends far beyond the scope of this video,  
so we will just share one interesting 
fact about each of them. The Gutenberg  
printing press and the Luther Bible set the 
foundation of a standardized German language,  
which was essential in the later unification 
process. When we look at places like Iceland,  
Albania or Sardinia it is easy to understand 
why those languages are conservative,  
yet despite having few natural defenses and 
being surrounded by more powerful states,  
the Dutch language is incredibly conservative. 
English is a member of the Germanic language  
family, yet only 26% of its vocabulary is 
Germanic, 29% of it is French, and 29% is Latin. 
 
Alongside these four major branches, there are 
several others, which we would love to cover  
in futures videos including the Balto-Slavic, 
Indo-Iranian, Armenian, Albanian, not to mention  
the now extinct Anatolian, Phrygian, Dacian, 
and Tocharian. Each of these language groups  
has a fascinating story as it changed throughout 
the years and under different regimes.  
The languages spread around the world, while other 
language groups left a lasting impact on them,  
particularly Arabic, Turkic, and Hungarian. Like 
this video and share it with your friends if you  
want us to delve deeper into the field of 
historical linguistics and tell us which  
branch or language family deserves an entire 
video with more details. 
 
