During the late 7th century BC, as the Iron
Age drew closer to an end in the Near East,
the mighty Assyrian Empire was finally defeated
and replaced by the Babylonians under
the leadership of King Nabopolassar.
Although Nabopolassar founded the Neo-Babylonian
Empire, it was his son, Nebuchadnezzar
the Second, who succeeded in expanding the new
empire and returning Babylon to its former glory.
This was the first time in a thousand
years, since the reign of Hammurabi,
that Babylon rose to dominate Mesopotamia.
Following his portrayal in the Bible,
Nebuchadnezzar would come to be regarded as an
oppressive and cruel enemy of the Jewish people.
Thank you to CuriosityStream
for sponsoring this video!
CuriosityStream is a subscription streaming
service that offers thousands of documentaries
and non-fiction titles from some of the world's
best filmmakers, including exclusive originals.
We recommend watching “Scribes of Ancient Egypt”.
It’s an in depth documentary examining
the importance of scribes in ancient
Egyptian society and how they shaped
our understanding of their culture.
CuriosityStream has no ads and can be
watched anywhere on your television,
laptop, or mobile device.
Go to curiositystream.com/historyexplained for
unlimited access to the world’s top documentaries
and nonfiction series, and for our viewers,
use promo code “historyexplained” and you will
save 25% off, which comes out to $14.99 a year
or only only $1.25 each month!
So click the link below or go to
curiositystream.com/historyexplained.
Nebuchadnezzar the Second,
the eldest son of King Nabopolassar
was born in 642 BC and was
likely named after his grandfather,
who was a governor in the city of Uruk
under the rule of King Ashurbanipal.
The name Nebuchadnezzar is derived from his
traditional Akkadian name ‘Nabu-kudurri-uṣur’,
which translates to “O Nabu,
protect my first-born son”.
Nabu being the Mesopotamian patron-god of
scribes, literacy and wisdom who gained great
prominence during the 1st millennium BC after
being identified as the son of the most powerful
god of the Babylonian pantheon, Marduk.
As Crown Prince of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar
took part in his father’s campaign to
conquer the city of Harran in 609 BC,
where the final Assyrian ruler, Ashur-uballit the
Second, had gathered the remainder of his forces.
The Battle of Harran led to the ultimate
defeat of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.
Subsequently, Nebuchadnezzar
was promoted and began taking
charge of troops alongside his father.
Together they led an army into a mountainous
region north of Assyria in 607 BC.
After his father returned to Babylon,
Nebuchadnezzar continued to lead independent
operations, serving as Commander-in-Chief and
securing major victories that solidified Babylon’s
status as the new superpower in the region.
The Egyptian pharaoh at the time, Necho
the Second, attempted to restore the fallen
Neo-Assyrian Empire by leading a large army into
former Assyrian territories and establishing a
base of operations in the city of Carchemish.
Nebuchadnezzar faced Necho and his forces
in 605 BC at the Battle of Carchemish and
dealt the Egyptians a devastating defeat.
Nebuchadnezzar's victory over the Egyptians
at Carchemish echoed throughout history,
appearing in several later accounts,
such as the Book of Jeremiah and
the Book of Kings in the Hebrew Bible.
When King Nabopolassar died in July of 605 BC,
Nebuchadnezzar rushed back
home to Babylon to stake his claim
to the throne before his younger brother,
Nabu-shum-lishir, had a chance to steal it.
Nabu-shum-lishir was never mentioned in
documents again after this point, leading
historians to speculate that he probably led an
unsuccessful revolt which resulted in his demise.
Upon becoming ruler, Nebuchadnezzar spoke directly
to the patron god of Babylon in his inaugural
speech, saying: “O merciful Marduk, may
the house that I have built endure forever,
may I be satiated with its splendor, attain
old age therein, with abundant offspring,
and receive therein tribute of the
kings of all regions, from all mankind.”
After burying his father, Nebuchadnezzar
returned to the front lines in Syria to
continue expanding what was now his empire.
In 604 BC, Nebuchadnezzar and his men
conquered the city of Ashkelon in the
Levant and proceeded to capture its king,
plunder its treasures and leave it in ruins.
Over the next three years, other states
including the Kingdom of Judah submitted
to the surging Babylonian empire and,
with the help of Greek mercenaries, the
empire was extended into Palestine.
Progress was halted abruptly in 601 BC, when
Nebuchadnezzar chose to march against Egypt.
Despite having defeated the Egyptians
at Carchemish, the attempted invasion
of Egypt was a complete and utter failure.
There were heavy casualties on both sides,
but the failure resulted in a loss
of confidence for the Babylonians.
Vassal states started to doubt the
power of Babylon, referring to the infant
empire as a “paper tiger”.
At home, Babylonians began to
disobey Nebuchadnezzar's direct orders
and even organized rebellions against him.
Turning his attention away from Egypt and
back towards the Levant, Nebuchadnezzar led
his army into the Syrian desert in 599 BC,
attacking and raiding Arabs along the way.
One year later, the Babylonians
captured the city of Jerusalem
in a campaign against the Kingdom of Judah.
Hoping that Egypt would lend support, Judah’s King
Jehoiakim challenged Nebuchadnezzar’s authority
and ultimately suffered greatly as a result.
King Jehoiakim died during the siege
and his uncle Zedekiah was subsequently
installed as ruler of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar.
Further campaigns into the Levant followed,
including the capture of the
Phoenician city of Tyre.
The Babylonian army swept through the region,
leaving a trail of devastation in their wake.
Nebuchadnezzar took full control of
all trade routes across Mesopotamia
and expanded his empire in every direction.
The warrior-king was persistent in his policy
of expansion, believing a universal kingship
to be a right granted to him by Marduk.
Following the unsuccessful invasion of Egypt,
Zedekiah of Judah refused to pay tribute
to Nebuchadnezzar and revolted in 589 BC.
This led to Nebuchadnezzar's defining moment;
the complete annihilation of the city of
Jerusalem, including Solomon’s Temple.
The destruction of Jerusalem prompted the
permanent end of the Kingdom of Judah.
As many as 20,000 Judeans, thought to make
up 25% of Jerusalem’s population at the time,
were captured and deported to Babylon.
The deportation of a conquered city’s citizens
was a common tactic that was often employed
by the Assyrians during their time in power.
The destruction of Solomon’s
Temple and the Babylonian Exile
were seen as fulfillments of Biblical prophecies.
These events led to the strengthening of
Judaic religious beliefs and began the Israelites'
transition from the polytheistic beliefs of
Yahwism to the monotheistic beliefs of Judaism.
Yahwism’s pantheon of many gods was headed
by Yahweh, the national god of the Isrealites,
along with his wife, the goddess Asherah.
The second-tier gods and goddesses consisted
of Baal, Yarikh, Mot, and Astarte, who
each had their own priests and prophets.
The Hebrew Bible would go on to refer
to Nebuchadnezzar as the "destroyer of
nations" and a cruel and mad ruler sent by God
to punish the Israelites for their many sins.
18th Century English painter William Blake’s
famous depiction of Nebuchadnezzar as a mad king
is based on the Book of Daniel’s unflattering
description of the ruler, which reads:
“He was driven away from people and ate grass
like the ox. His body was drenched with the dew
of heaven until his hair grew like the feathers of
an eagle and his nails like the claws of a bird.”
On the other hand, Babylonian sources
describe Nebuchadnezzar's reign as a
golden age that transformed Babylonia
into the greatest empire of its time.
Among Nebuchadnezzar’s many accomplishments
were the completion and expansion of fortifications
initiated by his father; building a great moat
and outer defense wall; constructing canals;
paving the Processional Way with limestone;
and renovating the city’s temples.
The beautiful Ishtar Gate that led into the
heart of the city was ordered by the King to
be surrounded with blue tiles and adorned
with images of animals representing gods.
Nebuchadnezzar was exceptionally proud of the
Ishtar Gate, and added a dedication plaque
inscribed in cuneiform that read: “Nebuchadnezzar,
King of Babylon, the faithful prince appointed by
the will of Marduk, the highest of princely
princes, beloved of Nabu, of prudent counsel,
who has learned to embrace wisdom, who
fathomed their divine being and reveres their majesty,
the untiring governor, who is constantly
concerned with the well-being of Babylon
and Borsippa, the wise, the humble, the firstborn
son of Nabopolassar. I laid the foundation
of the gates down to the ground water level
and had them built out of pure blue stone.
Upon the walls in the inner room of the
gate are lions, bulls and dragons, and thus
I magnificently adorned them with luxurious
splendor for all mankind to behold in awe."
Lions represented the goddess
of love and fertility, Ishtar.
Bulls represented the god of storms, Adad.
And dragons represented the central
Babylonian deity, Marduk.
Behind the enormous bronze
gates protecting the city were solid gold
statues and an opulent grand temple.
The most well-known construction associated with
Nebachadnezzar are the Hanging Gardens of Babylon,
which are recognized as one of the
seven wonders of the ancient world.
Legend has it that Nebuchadnezzar’s wife Amytis
of Medea missed her forested homeland so much
that the ruler built the extravagant
gardens to remind her of home.
Supposedly, the gardens were built
on a slope that consisted of a series
of terraces that were supported by
pillars made of baked brick and tar.
A Greek historian named Diodorus Siculus
described the gardens as being 400 feet wide,
400 feet long, and 80 feet high.
The gardens being so high up likely
meant that water was carried to the top of the
gardens by a primitive water irrigation system.
The exact location of the Hanging
Gardens remains a mystery to this day,
but there are skeptics who believe the gardens
were located elsewhere or never existed at all.
After ruling for 43 years, Nebuchadnezzar
died in Babylon on October 7th, 562 BC.
The empire’s throne was succeeded by one of his
sons named Amel-Marduk, but he was overthrown and
murdered less than two years later.
The Neo-Babylonian Empire was short-lived
and only lasted another 20 years before being
conquered by Cyrus the Great and incorporated
into the Achaemenid Empire in 539 BC.
Nebuchadnezzar was the longest-reigning king of
the Neo-Babylonian Empire and at the time of his
death was the most powerful ruler in the world.
Through his considerable military prowess
and remarkable construction accomplishments,
Nebuchadnezzar immortalized himself as one
of the greatest rulers of the ancient world!
Consider liking, commenting, subscribing and
clicking the bell icon for more videos like this.
Also, please consider becoming a member
on Patreon to help in the creation
of new videos.
Thank you!
