On the 26th of February, 1919, 
the Grand Canyon in Arizona  
officially became the 15th National 
Park of the United States of America.  
The canyon - actually a gorge of the Colorado 
River - and the many tributary canyons which  
surround it, are mostly comprised of extremely 
rugged and sheer terrain, although areas along  
the North and South Rim have been maintained 
and cultivated for the purposes of tourism.  
Dangers abound within the canyon itself, but even 
from well-maintained tourist areas on the rim it  
is surprisingly common for people to fall to their 
death, often in ways that completely defy belief.
National Parks in America are protected areas 
of wilderness selected for their natural beauty,  
their unique geology and ecosystems, and for the 
abundant opportunities for hiking, exploring,  
and other recreation that they offer. The Grand 
Canyon National Park is among the most popular,  
and is indeed considered to be one of 
the Seven Natural Wonders of the World.
Millions of people visit the Grand 
Canyon National Park each year,  
most of them without incident. They come to 
see the mind-bendingly vast gorge itself,  
to hike some of the many trails within it, to 
observe ancient rock art and geological formations  
and sometimes to enjoy river rafting 
or helicopter flights over the canyon.
To a casual visitor the idea that someone might 
fall from the rim into the canyon itself can seem  
absurd. The gorge is so vast, so unmissable, and 
so obviously hazardous that it seems only logical  
that it should inspire caution in all those who 
venture close to it... and yet records exist of  
more than 50 falls, the majority fatal, over 
the course of the National Park's existence.  
Most of these falls occurred not in 
remote areas off the beaten path,  
but instead at popular, busy viewing areas. 
Specifically because of the high number of  
visitors many of the most popular sightseeing 
areas have been fitted with railings or walls  
as well as highly-visible signs warning tourists 
to stay on the trails and away from the edge. To  
further mitigate the danger every visitor to 
the National Park is given either a pamphlet  
or a verbal warning describing the most prominent 
risks to life. Rangers patrol on a regular basis,  
speaking to visitors whenever they can to 
curtail any dangerous behavior... and yet still,  
despite all of this, falls do occur. Three causes 
predominate when it comes to falls from the rim.  
First and foremost people tend to fall when 
trying to take, or pose for, striking photographs.
While death in pursuit of a selfie might 
seem like a relatively modern phenomenon,  
the first fall of this kind occurred at a 
surprisingly early point in the canyon's history.  
On the 22nd of March, 1925, 40-year-old Lewis 
W Thompson was attempting to take a picture of  
himself standing on the rim of the canyon. While 
stepping to one side to better frame his picture  
he lost his footing and plummeted to his death.  
Since then dozens of other tourists have also 
passed away in pursuit of the perfect photograph.  
Among them is 20-year-old John Eric Hastrick. On 
the 27th of April, 1981, Hastrick was attempting  
to take a photo not of the canyon but of the 
Bright Angel Lodge hotel on the South Rim.  
Seeking a better angle, he 
clambered over a guardrail and,  
with his camera viewfinder glued to his eye, 
walked backwards towards the lip of the abyss.  
He went over the edge and fell to his death 
before he could line up the shot he wanted.
Almost two decades later, on the 19th of 
August, 1999, 25-year-old Gabriel Comerford  
was visiting Moran Point on the South Rim. 
He wanted a souvenir photo and, being alone,  
asked some fellow tourists if 
they would help him take one.  
They readily agreed, and Comerford handed them 
his camera. He then clambered over the guardrail,  
walked out onto a narrow precipice, lost 
his footing, slipped down a rocky slope  
and fell into the void. Not knowing what else 
to do, the tourist with his camera used it to  
take several photographs of Comerford's final 
moments - not the souvenir he would have wanted.
Many other people have also fallen victim to the 
desire for the perfect picture on the edge of the  
Grand Canyon. Despite this it is interesting to 
note that on almost any visit to the Grand Canyon  
National Park many many visitors can be seen 
in almost any popular viewing area traveling  
beyond the railings, clambering onto precarious 
ledges, or taking other incredible risks in  
order to pose for pictures. The second common 
cause of falls from the rim is more nebulous,  
but relates to the sheer scale of the canyon. 
Numerous reports exist of visitors being overcome  
with dizziness or a sense of vertigo when sitting 
on the canyon edge. One striking incident of  
this type took place on the 9th of March, 1989. 
34-year-old tourist Gesela Elixmann took a seat  
on the very edge of the canyon at Mojave Point on 
the South Rim, and enjoyed the spectacular view.  
When she tried to stand and move away from 
the edge, however, she was overcome with  
dizziness and fell to her death. Just three 
days later the same thing happened again.  
21-year-old tourist Yuri Nagata was visiting 
the West Rim's Second Trailview Overlook as  
part of a group tour. As they arrived at 
the viewing area the tour group leader  
addressed the group, telling them of the 
terrible incident involving Elixmann.  
Nagata dutifully listened to this cautionary 
tale and then immediately walked to the railing,  
crossed it, and took a seat on the rim of 
the canyon. When one of her friends asked  
her to stand and pose for a picture she, just like 
Elixmann, lost her balance and fell into the void.
While two identical incidents taking 
place so close together is rare,  
the story echoes throughout the history of the 
canyon. Before Nagata and Elixmann there was  
21-year-old Elizabeth Hazelhurst who, in 1971, 
sat on the rim of the canyon with friends and  
fatally lost her balance when she tried to stand. 
Before her there was 17-year-old Herbert E Kolb  
who, in 1947, died in exactly the same manner 
after watching the sunset from the rim with his  
girlfriend. In each case the victim took what they 
perceived to be a small risk: they sat on the edge  
of the canyon to take in the view - the very last 
view they would ever see. Thirdly, and finally,  
a small but significant number of falls have been 
caused by, quite simply, the desire to show off.  
On the 28th of November, 1992,  
38-year-old Greg Austin Gingrich was visiting the 
park with his family. The group were hiking along  
the South Rim when Gingrich saw an opportunity 
to play a practical joke on his teenage daughter.  
He planned to clamber up onto the low stone wall 
that separated the path from the canyon edge,  
then pretend to lose his balance 
and tumble off towards the void.  
He would then hop down onto a 
ledge on the other side of the wall  
and hunker there for a moment or two - just long 
enough to give his daughter a fright - before  
popping back up and revealing himself to 
be unharmed. His prank didn't go to plan.  
The moment Gingrich landed on the ledge he 
lost his footing and toppled over into the  
canyon proper. He dropped without making a sound, 
perhaps too shocked by his fatal miscalculation  
to even cry out as he fell. The target of his 
practical joke - his teenage daughter - was used  
to her father playing tricks on her. Unaware that 
he had actually fallen she carried on up the path,  
expecting him to follow as soon as 
he saw that his joke hadn't landed.  
She had walked all the way to the car park 
and met up with the rest of their group  
before she realized that anything was truly amiss. 
It would be past nightfall before a search and  
rescue team would find Gingrich's body and fully 
confirm that his final prank really had gone  
too far. Similarly showing off may have been a 
factor in another death on the 8th of September,  
1993. 51-year-old James Merriman was a Flagstaff 
resident who periodically rode his bicycle  
out to the Grand Canyon in order to crawl 
through the railings at popular tourist spots  
and gather coins from ledges, where 
tourists would throw them for good luck.  
Merriman would often camp in the canyon 
during these coin-collecting expeditions,  
and was known to park rangers. Indeed, just a 
week before they had been called to rescue him  
when he got into difficulty and became 
stuck on a ledge while gathering coins.
This incident, it appears, did not deter 
Merriman from his money-making scheme.  
On the 8th of September he visited Mather Point 
on the South Rim. Having clambered out past  
the railing and gathered some coins he found 
that he had a spellbound audience of tourists.  
Confident in his abilities, Merriman began 
jumping back and forth between two rocks,  
inviting the watching crowd to take his 
picture. His final words were, simply,  
"Watch me!" No sooner had he uttered them than 
he lost his footing and plunged to his death.
Again these are just a few 
incidents from a catalogue of many.  
Numerous unfortunate souls - the vast majority 
young and male - have suffered fatal falls while  
demonstrating their nerve and sure-footedness on 
the edge of one of the largest chasms on earth.
While it may seem improbable that anyone should 
fall into the Grand Canyon when the danger posed  
by it is so evident, it can and does happen. It 
is easy to decry the victims of these incidents as  
foolish, and to lament their lack of sense... but 
it is also important to remember that their lives  
were cut short by a simple lapse of judgment 
- a momentary misunderstanding or failure to  
appreciate the danger before them. In each case 
it was a brief and terrible miscalculation,  
made in a matter of seconds, the consequences of 
which consumed the entire rest of their lives.
